oh if you could do the the waiting room
is
that oh
okay hi everyone uh welcome to the Emily
Harvey event uh um my name is Eric SM my
co-organizer here is K TOA for our first
Speaker for the logic methodology of
Science and its applications uh
conference is Andre Rhoden and uh Andre
is a philosopher mathematician and um
historian um uh based in uh Lorraine um
uh I'll hand it over to Andre if uh so
they uh they could present the the first
talk of this
conference yeah uh thank you Eric thank
you everyone first of all I would like
to thank Eric Conor for inviting me for
organizing this event so I'll talk about
philosophical issue of homotopy type
Theory and that's uh actually is going
to be rather General talk so the main
purpose of the talk is to place uh
homotopy types here in a broad
philosophical historical context and so
I not going to be very specific about
homoy type the it's itself maybe because
that's just a
price uh for because of the time limits
so uh yeah here is the plan uh so I'll
start historically very traditionally
with K and say couple of Worlds about
his notion of transcendental logic then
I overview a little bit development of
philosophical logic after C and
Mathematics and then I'll stress a point
what I will call scholasticism in
pejorative sense in the analytic
philosophy of the 20th century then I
talk about topology Lo and logic and how
homo type Theory helps to uh somehow
to you know to to fight that kind of
Scholastic tendency and just come to
conclusion so uh I'll start with a very
famous
fragment from K's critique of pure
reason where he Compares
philosophical uh and mathematical
reasoning uh so I I read uh give a
philosopher the concept of triangle let
him the philosopher try to find out in
his own way how the sum of triangles
angles might be related to a right angle
so philosopher has nothing but the
concept of figure enclosed by three
straight lines and in it the concept of
equally many angles now he the
philosopher May reflect on his concept
as long as he wants yet he will never
produce anything new he can analyze and
make distinct the concept of a straight
line or of an angle of number three but
he will never come upon any other
properties that do not already lie in
this concept
but let now the geometry take up the
question so geometry begins at once to
construct a triangle and then follows
just description of construction I
probably better just show the
construction so what CL concludes here
that in that way which I'm now going to
to revise quickly uh geometra through a
chain of inferences Guided by intuition
as K put it geometry fully eliminated
and the same time General solution of
the question namely that sum of internal
angle of given triangle in ukian
geometry is equal to uh two right angles
yeah and this is the construction so we
given triangle ABC this is a this
additional construction so we need to
construct line C parallel to AB and then
and that's by the way is important point
that by known theorems earlier proved in
nucleus elements we have this equal
angles which are shown by the same color
red angle and two the pair of equal
angles shown in green right and then we
see that indeed this uh gamma and Alpha
and beta together make Pi Rion of
100 yeah 80° or to right angles and
that's so just by making this additional
construction we come to this conclusion
and prove our theorum and so K's point
was that actually that kind of reasoning
simply is not supported by what he
calls General logic right and what
sometimes he did not use this expression
formal logic but probably could be uh
identified with formal logic usually
people say it's Aristotelian even
actually there is also K writing where
he explicitly says what kind of logic
has in mind so it's Aristo in a very
broad sense of
course yeah and he distinguishes that
logic what from what he calls
transcendental logic which actually very
rich concept involves many thing but
basically it's logic of reasoning about
object of possible experience and object
of possible experience it's actually
mathematical objects which according to
Kant which essentially involve this
temporal Primal and arithmetic and
spatial primar in Geometry intuition and
which actually his idea was to describe
to introduces concept translative logic
as kind of logic of science right he
had Newton principia and he just tried
to how say to to understand how
reasoning Works in Newton principia and
he just found that this um what he call
General logic is simply not sufficient
for that right so we should make a
difference between kind of
uh not necessarily real things but at
least possibly real in the sense of
possibly experienced things and that's
for him was mathematics right and that's
why transcendental logic is something
different from this uh General logic
which does not make any difference
between say metaphysical reasoning right
just philosophical speculation and
scientific reason that's that's the idea
and then of course many things happened
say both in mathematics and in logic in
mathematics probably the most important
development was the discovery of
so-called non ukian geometries first by
laachi in Bal then uh
another uh another framework more
General was introduced by rean in the
middle of 19th century and that's by the
way is a judgment by Herman whale while
in 1923 where he says that actually all
this stuff
about uh parallel Pate because that's
was actually this theorum I can come
quickly back to to this proof right just
to prove that these angles are equal
which are shown on uh the same color
here you need this postulate of ukids
geometry which was contested which
unlike other postulates was kind of
suspicious so the matician walk on it
and finally laachi and Bay came to that
idea that that Pate may be simply simply
wrong and we may develop kind of more
General geometry and uh actually rean
kind of put forward the same point and
for Veil for example for whom of course
uh this ranian geometry is the geometry
of special theory of relativity so the
geometry of physical SpaceTime so for
him important thing was uh this uh
conception of remaining manifold rather
than stuff about uh about parallel
Pate yeah and that's just demonstrate so
in these other geometries the theorem
chosen by K for that example maybe
unfortunately no longer holds right so
in this so-called hyperbolic geometry
the sum is actually depends on the size
of triangle it's not the same for all
triangles and it's always strictly less
than uh two right angles and in a
different uh geometry
uh called elliptic geometry which in a
sense was well known already as
spherical geometry so here you may think
about just triangle on a sphere right
formed by uh big circles uh of the
sphere and here you have this sum always
strictly uh bigger than two right angles
so in a sense that was wrong theorem and
that actually was a point for for which
for people like Russ
was the point of critique of his
critique of K that according to Russell
all his approach somehow failed because
you see now you have these different
geometries where we have different
theorem so so what can believed
allegedly as a general principle General
kind of transcendental logic uh
ultimately fails both in mathematics and
in physics by the way right if we come
to different theor of of space SpaceTime
like Einstein's uh special and then
general relativity right but but then
there were also very
important developments in uh logic some
people describe it as a revolution in
logic uh due to golop F so it's came a
bit later than these discoveries of non
geometry mathema I call it non Aristo
but it's not usual way to describe that
but I think the parallel is pretty much
much the same so in a sense this New
Logic generalizes this aristan logic
right so you can reproduce aristan logic
within this new Fagan logic just like
you can find a place for ukian geometry
in say ranian geometry so uh
fry just published this uh
V concept writing the grip shrift
1879 but but then it's important for my
story how he did that actually he did it
by borrowing a mathematical concept into
logic which saying traditional logic
before fry simply was not considered as
a part of logic and that's is a concept
of function which in the fr's logic
became kind of logical uh primitive
concept and he's very explicit about
what what he's doing he also so making
reference to history so of course for
his time this concept of function was
not new in mathematics already was
around for at least two
centuries yeah and and that's of course
with fraggy fraggy also had a that idea
that
arithmetic is purely logical right that
you may do What
can't told us we cannot do with logic uh
with the general logic but with this new
logic we can do at least for arithmetic
not for geometry but for arithmetic but
then of course we we can see that
actually what fry is doing right he's
kind of uh blur this distinction between
General and transcendental logic so that
fr's logic is Transcendental in a sense
even fraggy wouldn't call it in that way
right because it's uh it's um has it its
constitutive part it this a very
important mathematical concept which
earlier was seen as purely mathematical
but fry argu that it's actually logical
right so it's very much about the
boundary say between uh pure logic and
something which is mathematics but not
logic okay and then of course there were
very diverse view uh one radical view
was that by Russell so-call logicism who
considered that actually all of
mathematic is logic but logic in that
new sense but again Russell actually to
defend the thes he further broaden his
notion of logic so
some form of say set theory or theory of
classes was seen by Russell as part of
logic that's why he made he could at
least
U how say put forward this idea that all
of mathematics is
logic even this certain difficulties
I'll come in a minute to these
difficulties but then there were very
different view like that of
Brower about the same time right who who
would say logic is just kind of exeler
part of mathematics right that
mathematical reasoning basically not
logical reasoning and uh logic is kind
of just exeler part of mathematic which
has to do with language with how
mathematical reasoning is uh is
communicated and for Brower is kind of
secondary issue right and again of
course the if we compare this to you we
see it's all depends on what one
understand by Logic right by the scope
of logic which is very much uh different
for Brower and and Russell but actually
what we could say received view which
somehow prevailed uh recently it was not
my invention was called logic first view
right and in actually it's kind of
traditional I I would say Scholastic
view that logic is kind of basis of
everything of any reasoning and then
we add to Logic on the top of this pure
Logics say more axum more principle like
principle of set theory thop Frankle set
theory and made out of that all of
mathematics or we may also try to
reconstruct other scientific theories
actually expression of that view I found
probably there are others in Mario buong
that was in his book on philosophy of
physics where he just states there is
single theory that start from stretch
mathematical logic and other theories
they kind of presuppose logic but then
he is more specific he says not just
logic right un specifically he says
precisely the least a mathematical
scientific theory takes for granted is
the so-called ordinary classical to Val
predicate calculator so he has in mind
something very specific and actually
that's version roughly what frag
invented enriched with the micro theory
of identity every statement in
mathematic in science uh as far as its
form is concerned is a formula of that
calculus and every VAR reasoning in a
say physical theory is an instant and of
course that's
very strong very dogmatic I would say
View and what actually comes out is not
what when he really tries to reconstruct
physic in that way it it comes out
something that physicist would hardly
Rec recognize usually right and but but
then of course the
usual rhetoric is just saying okay
physicist they are not logicians they
don't really understand what they are
doing but we as a philosophical aici
should make things clear and uh somehow
bu foundations for for Science and for
mathematics right and here is just a
kind of supp points that uh This Modern
view coming first of all from Hilbert in
his attempt to uh lay down foundations
of
geometry actually he also came with kind
of Novel concept of theory which fry
actually objected and didn't share and
and uh that assumes that actually a
theory can admit for different
interpretation okay for people who know
that's simple but basically that that
means that we have a theory is a kind of
scheme right like a logical scheme which
admits for different uh terms and and
they may be very different more
different than say usual uh right but
think which probably not all the the
time stressed and goes somehow unnoticed
that this reinterpretation this
possibility to model something in this
framework concerns only non logical
terms you see so logic is supposed to be
fixed and constitute Universal formal
framework very much what could be called
Scholastic
pattern uh right and and then I I want
to say couple of work what I would call
coltic I don't have definition of
scholasticism Colm is certainly not
Aristotle Aristotle is very rich very
dialectical you have many many
conflicting ideas in resan text so it's
rather refers to kind of uh conservative
tendance in schools say medieval schools
but actually I would better say about
kind of Noel scholasticism and some
people here is a character called Joseph
Maria Bensky who was new Tommy so he was
part of this move in Catholic philosophy
he was a Catholic priest himself uh to
somehow to revive scholasticism so for
him scholasticism was very positive and
actually modern science starting with
Galileo was kind of Decline and
philosophy of course K Hegel whatever
that's all was declined actually this
neist movement was when it started in
192 20s was not aware about new stuff in
logic like FR but uh Bensky later put
frag put all modern logic in the service
of this idea of
Reviving kind of high scholasticism and
actually it was also very politically
oriented because he's a founding father
of so-called uh sovietology right so he
hoped to fight kind of dogmatic Marxism
and stuff
with this kind of uh ideological means
right but even if we're not talking
about special character like him but
just talking kind of practice here I
took a quote basically arbitr for uh
Stanford encyclopedia Philosophy by
William AAL it's called emergence of
first order logic and you can see it's
all this story it's described in
hegelian way right how
the first order logic is a you know kind
of ultimate truth but of course people
cannot how they itue it immediately so
they do some other stuff like type
Theory but but finally they they
everything converg to this big truth of
first order Logic No I maybe a little
bit exaggerating now but but you can you
you can see right and and I think it's
really kind of harmful dogmatism which
is probably not due to any particular
philosopher right but but rather whole
community of so-called analytic
philosophers it's part of what is called
analytic
philosophy and one particular example
for example interpretation of second
godles in complet theorem right so it
just comes to kind of wisdom that
consisten of formal system uh system
cannot be proved in this system and uh I
just want
to uh signal a recent work by Serge arov
who actually shows that that's wrong and
not because in mathematics is anything
wrong so arov does not challenge
mathematical part of argument but what
he challenge he actually interprets what
is a proof how mathematical proof is
represented formally actually allows for
a lot of freedom and uh this is not
mathematics right that is kind of more
modeling of practice with with
mathematics so there is a lot of
flexibility here and uh I would
formulate it and call Canon
methodological principle but that's my
principle not K but I think it's Canon
that philosophical thesis are not proof
or disproved by mathematical or meta
mathematical reasoning just like
mathematical conjectures are not proof
or disproved by philosophical argument
so I think it's very wrong partn say
okay we know how to prove uh second
goodles incompleteness theum hence we
have this philosophical wisdom and we
soled some philosophical question no no
of course there is interesting interplay
between mathematical results and say
philosophy and that's what we are doing
here but it does not work that St for
straightforwardly at all right and of
course in 20th century we also had a
kind of alternative developments right
so of course there was important issue
in 20 since mid 20s about intuitionistic
logic whether or not we
should assume a middle of low excluded
middle as universal principle so there
is the whole line of reasoning saying
that we should not then it's actually
related there were type theories
starting by the way by Russell in the
very same book I already referred to as
an attempt to avoid the difficulty
Paradox because in that book first
Russell kind of treated this class
Theory very naively what usually called
naive set theory and uh developing type
theory was his way to avoid it then
later there were typed uh uh version of
Lambda calculus which is U also was
conceived by Alon the church as a kind
of
computational uh in that same sense
constructive uh Foundation of
mathematics and uh again it turned out
that typed version of that theory is
richer and has a lot of connection with
category Theory which we discovered
later I can and finally what is more
relevant to our story is a uh
intuitionistic type Theory this is a
name that per love chosen for his system
which he started development in early'
70s where he applied this philosophical
principle of say logic of evidence but
it was also a typed logical systems
system I think he didn't say it's
foundational mathematics rather the idea
that it's General uh system of say
formal logic kind of prepared for Compu
implementation for computational
implementation and such implementation
were made also very early in first
implementations were immediately in in'
70s right now uh I can just as another
interesting kind of sideline of
developing logic in 20th century
concerns topology so topology is a kind
of geometry where we don't care about
sizes right and uh so we only care about
uh uh put it that way things which are
continuously transformable into each
other seen as the same right so we say
we may distinguish between donut and uh
just a bowl but we cannot distinguish
between a donut bigger donut small
somehow uh curve do Etc and so it turned
out actually that was due to
tarski okay I yeah who discovered this
topological semantics for classical
enthusan logical calcul of course
logical calcul already in a modern Fagan
sense and I think that alone could
suggest kind of Canan interpretation
right that after all look we kind of
discovered that logic involves kind of
spal thinking right but but
certainly tarski did not see that way
and actually I don't know about any any
one who did probably I should look
better yeah because tar also has this
book introduction L to the logic and
methodology of deductive Sciences where
he says things very much like buong
right so it's again this I would call
Standard Scholastic setting logic first
then we add stuff that's how every
Theory works so what to do with this
topological semantics from that point of
view absolutely that unclear for me at
least and I think tarski never Aris that
question then there is a whole bunch of
work uh on topos SE and topus logic and
here I just took a quote from a paper
where Bill L first introduced actually
axioms of topus for topus Theory and
okay he uses this uh hegelian language
but it's not my point now so he a Unity
of opposites in the title the title is
Quantified and shift in shifts is
essentially that between logic and
geometry and there are compelling
reasons that maintaining that geometry
is the leading
aspects a gr and topology appears more
naturally as model operator usual
logical operators have natural analogies
which apply to fams of geometrical
object rather than to proposition fix so
you see again again the idea that real
say principle of geometry and principles
of logic somehow
connected yeah and uh actually the
probably
best way to show that available to the
data I would say is of course homotopy
type Theory which was still I was
discovered in 2006 Vladimir vodi
distributed that um short text called
homotopical Lambda calus where uh where
he says he talks about kind of
hypothetical type Theory which would
combine actually which would admit for
interpretation in homotopy theory but
also preserve this standard logical
significant then because this is issue
of um priority I should mention there
was a independent work by Steve Ai and
Michael Warren but actually it was
published three years later so I would
still as a historian give
priority to woty because of this
publication so they independently quite
independently of vodi in a different way
actually discovered homotopic sertic
models of identity types in a type
Theory so the idea is that types are
spaces storms are point and logic is in
a sense part of
geometry oh okay so probably I have
already should finish in couple of
minutes so that's I just found in
Internet some explanation for homotopia
Theory I just want to mention one thing
that uh that way to represent homotopy
right is not quite faithful because one
and the same
curve uh right that we can draw
represent actually the whole class of
what in homotopy theory is called a path
because path is not just a curve but
it's peret iiz Cur right so you should
think about path as a motion in a say
space time not just as a curve in the
space and that's actually at least for
my point is very is very important then
we have this way to handle uh homotopies
and homotopy is a like path between
paths or if you like continuous
transformation of One path into another
path and then we have the whole lettera
of this
Transformations which goes up to
infinity and which we can treat say
algebraically with a concept of higher
groupoid but that's not important so in
a homotopic type Theory that's these
paths actually uh
represent identities so if I want to say
that morning star from frag example is
the same as a Evening Star I should find
a
path between them which by the way makes
perfect physical sense right but the
whole point of this theory of course
that there are could be more than one
path right and here I try to draw
gravitational lensing uh which may
appear if you have kind of massive
object here but also if you have a warm
hole so it's a hole in SpaceTime that
gives effect of uh gravitational lazing
so physically you have the same uh say
object You observe it but you see two
different objects right because of this
effect which you should identify but
identify already like second level on
you you should find right
uh right and now I come back to
philosophy so I say since homotopy typ
the invols this intive spal teral
thinking reasoning it qualifies as
transcendental in kind sense and that of
course if weum we we buy this kind idea
that spot temporal reasoning is a
reasoning about objects of possible
experience or more precisely we may
describe what is a piece of intuitive
mathematics where this transcendental
logical part is made quite formal
rigorous and
explicit right so withold the sc's idea
of transcendental logic as logic of
scientific Empirical research rooted in
the human spal temporal intuition I in
you stands against the critical
arguments by Russell and others right
and it goes without saying some probably
it's correction to Kant probably not
probably it's correction rather to
interpretation some interpretation of
Kant but it goes without saying I would
say that the human intuition is not
fixed one and for all biologically or
otherwise but evolves with the progress
in mathematic but also by the way which
probably is appropriate in this
Foundation to say also VI uh developing
Visual Arts and Music but that's could
be of course topic for different
different talk and I just conclude with
saying couple of words about uh David
corfield who I hope probably will
comment so in 2020 David published this
uh very interesting book where he
described uh describe typ Theory as New
Logic for philosophy right and actually
the idea that is in introduction David
Compares C today with say this New Logic
frag is Russell logic 100 years ago so
if I understand David correctly please
correct me David if I do not so David
proposes to do the same ort now right so
we we have make a new Revolution in
philosophical logic
sorry yes by just
replacing that already now old calculus
by that new calculus right and so I
basically I'm sympathetic to what idea
but with one important res
reservation because I don't think that
we need anything like the logic so
instead of just replace one logic by
another logic I think what we actually
need is BU to explore various system of
logic of course it happens in itself but
I think we need more kind of
philosophical justification for doing
that and using actually two things both
all novel mathematical approaches which
may be appropriate and historically
informed in a sense traditional I would
say philosophical thinking expressed in
natural language rather than any formal
system and of course H itself is not
stable think is rapidly developed I'm
particularly interested now with So-Cal
directed homotopy type Theory which
actually shows even more explicit that
temporal dimension of this New Logic but
I I have a upcoming paper about that but
I cannot talk about this now so just to
conclude I think that philosophy needs
to pursue its critical revision of
fundamental principle of reasoning using
homotopy type theory in
different versions probably something
else but it should avoid in my view by
all means making hot or any other advice
logic into into a new Orthodoxy thank
you great thank thanks Andre um next we
have K mclary he's an American logician
whose Publications have ranged widely in
philosophy and the foundations of
mathematics as well in the history of
Science and Mathematics he's currently
the Harry The Truman P handy professor
at Case Western University in the
department of
philosophy let me just add you as a
co-host here
you should have the co-host now T okay
well anyway I can I can talk uh do
people hear me is it coming through okay
good uh first I want I want to thank the
organizers it's a nice opportunity here
and I want to say hi to Andre and dve
David I haven't it's been a
while well so I I really like that
introduction to Kant um both Andre and
David bring a really valuable depth of
philosophic knowledge a lot of these
discussions are are made just too
technical um we sort of we know what
Kant is what Kant said because we
remember what we said on our qualifying
exams which we don't even remember in
fact um so it's it's welcome to have a
deeper conversation
uh I personally wonder whether homotopy
type Theory will qualify as as
transcendental logic and cons sense or
as an improved improved explication of
it but I I would want to do that by
discussing it not you know um not just
certainly not by not knowing the cont
material that's not going to help at all
um oh my
goodness I look like a
vogon I can put it back if you'd like
okay
yeah
um because my picture the P the
thumbnail I'm getting to myself looks
like a human being
um there we
go but uh you can't just well okay if
you can't get the the thumbnail of me um
I I did want to say precisely in terms
of bringing in the historical frus frus
mathematical concept of function okay
it's great that he does drawing a
mathematical concept of function but it
is very specifically it's an explicit
program that's identified with deay and
vros to reform the notion of function to
make it more logically rigorous and it
was it was not at that time and has
never been the most General notion of
function actually used in
analysis um we we talk about about
generalized functions things like the
the deay Delta function which every
textbook that introduces it says well
this isn't really a function but we're
going to call it a function for the rest
of this book and people did call it a
function and um fora for example who
introduces it was not interested in
hearing that it wasn't a function so
there were many other function Concepts
than the one fro was relying on fro was
trying to extensional lie the the notion
a function is input output input output
if if output's defined for every input
that's a function but that was not the
most the most General at the time um and
has never been the most the most General
um Terren to lately has been actually
arguing that for example measurable
functions should be called functions
they're just rougher than set theoretic
functions distributions should be called
functions they're just rougher than
measurable
functions uh I I've been talking a lot
about uh uh Stein and shikari and
Princeton lectures on analysis where
they take the opposite approach
officially a function for them is a set
theoretic function
but they they comment on how they will
informally use much wider Notions of
function through throughout the book um
and that's that's directly relevant here
because one of the later Notions not not
prominently available in fraga's time
but now
is well a whole nest of ideas of
homotopy there's classical topological
homotopy it's that theoretically we pass
the idea passed in topology where where
well I mean that's that's been discussed
but also vodi was keenly aware of
homotopy homotopy theoretic conceptions
in a much broader context inherited from
Groen deque so it's it's actually
relevant that frager's concept wasn't
really the only one at the time it was
part of a particular Mo movement to make
ma mathematics rigorous and and it was a
great movement in a way it made progress
in calculus of variations possible that
was not going to happen without that
that style of rigor isation but it's
just not the only it's not the only one
at the time or now um or or at any time
in
between what I what I particularly value
in homotopy theory though type Theory
though is moving ahead proving theorems
getting results developing new versions
be being more specific and the specific
thing I wanted to bring up here
is I mean most of us want to avoid Dogma
I I guess they're well of course the
Catholic Church doesn't want to avoid
Dogma they have a particular sense of it
um most of us want to avoid Dogma but
what is what is the alternative to dogma
and I think the relevant alternative for
us here is giving
reasons and as Andre Andre talked about
this this G this dogmatic interpretation
of GLE which he specifies it's not G
theorems it's a dogmatic interpretation
of G theorems but here we need to
appreciate that g theorems they don't
just differ from Dogma by not being
dogmatic they differ specifically by
giving requirements and drawing
conclusions the conclusion only follows
if the requirements are met and is only
meant to follow if the requirements are
met and here it's worth discussing those
requirements um the first is the theorem
only applies to consistent
theories there are people who have seen
consistency as a Dogma I think there's a
kind of a red herring here that in early
at least American English consistency
meant refusing to change your mind it
didn't mean not contradicting yourself
and so we get quotes of of thorough and
Emerson attacking consistency but they
mean obstinacy they don't mean what we
what we call consistency um I think most
of us are not willing to give up
consistency in anything we'd call a
foundation for mathematics that that
requirement we're I think most of us
actually do want
um the C the foundation has to include
at least a certain amount of arithmetic
a surprisingly small amount of
arithmetic and again I think most of us
don't we simply don't call something a
foundation for mathematics if it doesn't
include at least that much arithmetic
that's we just we just wouldn't um
Elementary ukian geometry as aaed by
tarski and much explored in the 1950s
though it goes back to insights in
1919 um it doesn't interpret that much
arithmetic and it is a complete Theory
there there is a complete first order
theory of Elementary ukian geometry and
but nobody calls it a foundation for
mathematics it's just ukian geometry and
he can't interpret arithmetic but then
we come to the to the big one the one
that OV wants to change
um that you should have an effective
proof
predicate now this is what OV does this
is not this is not knew Curry already in
the
1950s was saying well we can we can
evade the conclusion of G's theorem I
don't think that was really his interest
in the work he was doing I think he
thought it was a PE call thing to to to
observe about the work he was doing that
goodles theorem won't apply here here we
have a complete Theory it includes a
complete theory of arithmetic
the catch so we say w wow a complete
theory of arithmetic I want to learn
that one the catch is you can't learn it
because it's not effectively aati well
the proof predicate is is not effective
um you're allowed to invoke any truth
true statement of arithmetic at any
point in a proof so when you're proving
something you can invoke the twin Prime
the the the twin Prime theorem that
there are infinitely many twin primes I
spoke too fast either you can invoke it
or its negation we just don't know which
but one of them is true and you can
invoke that
one well I think
uh I don't know the value of a
foundation for mathematics where you
can't tell what counts as a proof I
think this is something that we all
experience as we're learning mathematics
there is no routine way to tell what's a
theorem of say arithmetic you the twin
Prime conjecture for example nobody
knows if that's a theorem of arithmetic
but we would like there to be a routine
way to check a purported proof we really
do in general want if I if you're going
to give me a candidate proof I should be
able to tell whether it is one now this
may take me 400 years you know if it's
like me personally and you give me W's
proof affirm o Last Theorem but it
should in principle be possible to do
routinely um and I think when you see
those I'm really not interested in a
found a that doesn't have that doesn't
satisfy all those
requirements uh and I and I will insist
this is this is not a Dogma I've given
my reasons if you don't like my reasons
you can you can disagree with me um but
if you're going to disagree with me I
would kind of ask that you tell me which
one of those you disagree with um aramov
Curry the one they go with is let's have
an an ineffective proof predicate but I
think when you understand the stakes you
you don't want want an ineffective proof
predicate as to the as to later
developments in hopy type Theory yeah
this is wonderful I I I really like
seeing that that theory develop
um I
I I would like to see more discussion of
the identity predicate now the identity
identity is the focus of much much
discussion and the particular there's a
claim which I will tell you I don't like
that that homotopy type theory for the
first time gives a structural Criterion
of
identity well homop type theory has two
Notions of identity which frankly so did
every categorical logic and one of them
is isomorphism and variant as one of
them was all the time in in categorical
logic it is different from the law of
categorical Logics because the identity
relation isn't the diagonal and
cartisian product but it's not different
in the sense that
C that categorical logic has always had
an internalized identity predicate on
each type and used an a non-structural
notion of identity in the in the meta
theory in the
axz um I I think the homotopy type
theorists ow us more of an explanation
of what what is actually new there um in
terms of in detail what's new well that
we know that's in the hot book yay I
mean it's very interesting stuff
but I think it is not not reasonable to
declare that this is the first
structural foundation for
mathematics um that's what I have oh oh
yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah I'm I'm I'm at
the fields Institute nice place they
gave me a room to to zoom
from so so those are just some thoughts
I have about this but in terms of uh the
work going on Yeah by all means have the
work go on I I wish I could stay and and
hear if David's going to comment comment
on on Andre
um I forget where I was was going anyway
um so that's that's what I think I I
really welcome this better philosophical
information that I associate with both
Andre and not only with Andre and David
there are other philosophically informed
people doing Phil philosophy of logic
but way too much disc philosophy of
logic assumes really dramatically
oversimplified philosophical
conceptions so I will I will actually
close with that because I you see I'm
getting interrupted already but uh okay
that's what that's what I
have there any comments on that I'll see
if anybody shall I say something just
briefly uh yeah thank great to see you
again Colin when's it last time Beijing
I think long time ago uh yeah yeah one I
mean sorry if I can just refer back also
to to to Andre's sort yeah I no way was
I suggesting that that hot become the
the the single the single Logic
for the future in any way shape or form
in fact I mean the book spends all for
one thing there's all sorts of
developments the directed type Theory
that's mentioned last two chapters kind
of get into the modal world the mo the
world of modal homotopy type three
really really interesting stuff going on
there around this linear had any people
heard of this linear homotopy type
theory that kind of uh feeds into
becomes a kind of logic of quantum
physics if you follow it um but yeah by
by no means am I ever wanting to to
crush things down to to a specific
Choice um yeah I agree also with Caren
that I mean this yeah it's sort
of the idea that this is the first right
structural foundational language has got
to be wrong isn't it uh you know it's
naturally it's so so intertwined with
with with category Theory you know I
don't see these things as very separated
in my mind in many ways
um yeah when you encounter this world
you find I I don't find myself sort of
naturally very type theoretically uh uh
oriented when I when I sort of go into
this world I always sort of translate
back into category threeory really most
of the time yeah and and that's the
whole that's the the joke about this
computational trinitarianism it's it's
like there's just three angles on the
same stuff and um you know you should be
anything good in in that that that makes
sense for for one of these approaches
should make sense for the other
approaches so so uh and and in fact yeah
I mean you know I'm getting quite
interested in fact you you'll notice
that my uh affiliation has has changed
it won't be the University of Kent
anymore because they're closing down
philosophy there and I'm seem I don't
think it's been announced yet but I'm
I'm heading off in into into the world
of apply um what do they call it yeah
apply category Theory you know
this this seems to be my future for the
next year anyway um right and and and
they're they're really really sort of
versatile in the kind of category
theoretic tools they're going to use and
they're doing a kind of Applied
philosophy I I would say um so so yeah
very very open to all sorts of
approaches great great or be in touch
yeah yeah yeah
sure okay if there's nothing else anyone
wants to say to me I thank you very much
very just about the Z so okay that's
probably for different disc
but I'm not sure I really because my
understanding what his main argument
right his AR argument is that what we
call you know proof in mathematics what
we can reasonably call is not
necessarily just a formal derivation so
so this proof of uh consistency is not
like cor PA but but it could be just a
scheme where you could and then you
avoid that conclusion that that's just
this right yeah but the thing is G's
theorem doesn't depend on any very
precise definition of proof it depends
on there being an arithmetically
characterizable
Criterion for for what proof is now
there's lots of different
arithmetization for what couns approve
well I mean you might claim you have
something other than an
arithmetization too but if you're not
going to have
if you don't have an effective proof
predicate if you don't have some
describable way of of saying what
councils appr proof which can always be
applied
right of what counts as a theorem which
can't always be applied we don't know
whether twin Prime's conjecture is a
theorem but we should be able to take a
candidate proof and always tell whether
it is indeed a proof right and basically
that's what G theorem requires it it's
not it doesn't require any specific as
how that's
done right right actually that that
argument is only about second theorem so
it's not it's about the first first also
it has more cutting force on the second
but the incompleteness it depends on you
being able to characterize proofs inside
the
arithmetic and GLE when he when he
announced this theorem he was clear he
said to everybody he was unhappy he gave
it for prinkipia Mathematica and related
systems and he was clear that he could
not tell you which related systems he
was unhappy about that and then he
starts telling people after Turing
develops his his idea of a turing
machine and his proof that the various
Notions of Effectiveness are equivalent
he starts saying yes I think Turing is
right what I mean is a recursive proof
predicate a a theory with a that's
that's what related systems are any
systems that has an effective proof
predicate okay and we live without
effective crit IIA for lots of things
all the time but I don't like calling
those things proof so I I want to have
an effective Criterion for something I'm
going to call a
proof yeah yeah but it not necessarily a
formula right so proof is not
necessarily just a a syntactic object in
that sense yeah at least this is what
Serge suggests right that that proof on
his account is not just a formula it's a
scheme where you put different stuff you
see and that's not a formula but if well
but is is it effectively
recognizable if if I give a proof that
what he can if I give what I hope is a
proof for him can he tell whether it's a
proof or Not by his Criterion or does he
have to say well that depends on some
faction no yes because you can recognize
this scheme right you can recognize that
that scheme but then you you should know
how interpret that so it makes part of
what's all proof is a formal and what
you do with that you mean that's all
formalizable right that's all
formalizable yeah but then you will get
an incompleteness there on no look at
his paper at least I well I see yeah
there have been a long the series of
people who what they do is they don't
have an effective proof predicate like I
say curry in the
1950s yeah yeah and like I I suspect
he's going to end up there's not an
effective proof
predicate okay that that's good Point
yeah think anyway there was a comment
from the or from the on the
chat yes hello um thank you to the
organizers um my camera may not be
working um but I'm a real human being um
I uh wanted to ask David Colin and Andre
specifically David because he's written
about computational alternar ISM but I
think my naive question I think uh
applies to uh a new concept that you've
spoken about regarding whether or not
you can um whether you can assume uh you
know like the twin Prime conjecture and
an argument and from in the computation
trinitarian perspective there's this uh
correlation between Type Theory
computation and category and compost
Theory um so for those who are not
familiar with that but if I were to
express in say a programming language
like hll to say to use something called
a maybe monad um and to say you know
maybe this is true or not or nothing um
or I could use other monads like either
like either this is true or this is uh
then I'm wondering how that might
translate into your description of
someone assuming that the uh twin Prime
conjecture uh you know holds um in the
case of the mon add it allows us to
perform this
computation uh assuming that there may
be something or it could not we can
handle that um and I'm wondering how
that might translate into the example
that you're giving me what I might
assume something and an argument um but
have that be open or probable um so I
was hoping maybe someone could give some
sort of clarity to my naive
interpretation of the computational
trinitarianism perspective on that
example should I give that a go uh okay
I mean yeah I'm not sure I can answer
directly to the specifics I mean just if
people are wondering what what this is
about this computation it's a funny name
and and a lot of people don't like the
kind of religious Overture of
trinitarianism be
dogmatic but you know as I say you
really can you know if you encounter the
type if you haven't encountered type
Theory before but you you come along and
you see oh strange introduction
elimination rules you know what the hell
are they uh you know if you've come it
and your background is in category
Theory well you know it's all to do with
co-units and units and and and
isomorphisms arising from adjunctions oh
oh that's why it's there
so yeah it's that kind of feeling that
that anything kind of that's really seen
as important from one perspective really
should have a a ready explanation in the
in the other in the other format yeah so
you could you might think well why don't
I just take it from the category the
theoretic side and just you know just
talk about co-units and units and
whatever so so but the thing you're
talking about so anything that's
important so something around uh the
things to do with monads so that's
that's appeared in computer science it's
to do with problems to do with effects
and resources this sort of world is
where they they start employing monads
and
comonads uh or or their equivalent of it
and and right the category theorists
from their perspective understand
whatever it was that the computer
scientists were reaching for and and say
look this is one of our constructions so
that's good trinitarianism says you
found something useful because it's
making sense in our language um so again
we go around the circle they're going to
be very close to kind of Notions of
modality so the type theorists already
would have because they're coming out of
kind of more logical background they
would have already had Notions of
modalities going on there um so again
you get the tie in between them the
modalities of of the legal the type
theorist this hit hits or reaches out to
the the monards and nards of the
category theorist again all all good
stuff I think you're asking a very
specific thing about one particular kind
of Monet or whatever that's appear
Hearing
in in some aspect and you're kind of
wondering about taking it around the
triangle of this trinitarianism which
I'm not sure I can say too much to in
its specificity generally speaking Yeah
you know if it's important it will go
around this triangle you you'll find you
know you'll it'll make sense through the
other the other three corners of the
triangle
um yeah thank
you um great well I guess uh David we're
going right into your talk now oh okay
just trying to share a
screen
sure okay hopefully can hopefully people
can see that um good okay so uh thanks
of course to the organizers perhaps
people are a little surprised to see
this as my title um uh I suppose we
could put it down to I was having a nice
chat online with uh with Eric and his
his partner Alisa uh interesting wide-
ranging conversation about all sorts of
things and we touched upon uh issues to
do with psycho analysis and so on and
and so it was suggested to me to talk
about
this if I don't know if anyone even
knows about me but if they do they
probably would know about me through a
couple of books to do with philosophy
mathematics so so may be surprised to to
hear that I know anything about psycho
analysis so just to fill in a little
background so after a uh four years of
math as an undergrad um you know usual
turmoil of of the young of the youth I
got interested in psycho analysis and uh
probably for the next sort of six years
or so it kind of it was my main
intellectual interest was was in
psychoanalysis and and I was even
thinking to become an analy and then I
kind of shift over to to philosophy
keeping up some interest I mean I
co-wrote a book with a psychoanalyst
friend of mine called uh why do people
get ill so looking at the psychoanalytic
understanding of psychosomatic illness
um but yeah really sort of disappeared
out of my life but uh uh it's sort of
come back last two or three years it's
come back in in quite a big way maybe
maybe the troubles in my employer
shaking the foundations of my life and
the demise of philosophy at Kent um
perhaps stirred it up again who knows
but anyway I've been looking looking
back at psych psychoanalytic writings uh
in the last two or three years so just
some thoughts uh tentative thoughts
should we say and hopefully they'll be
of interest to
people okay so as I say um
uh why is that not
moving what's going on soorry my slides
don't seem to be proceeding why would
that
be
ah no that's very strange not sure
what's happening
there per one thing I might do let me
just stop the share a minute and share a
different
sorry this just a little moment just
going
to there come back out maybe this will
work I share that
maybe is that hopefully is that going to
work why is
that oh yeah it's not it's not full
screen you know trick is you you first
doing it full screen and then use this
stop button to get back to zoom that's
how it oh I got to come back out oh gosh
sorry I got to come back out
sorry come to hear full screen where's
my full screen on this
control got
it I can I just make the screen bigger
okay I guess that'll that'll probably do
the trick
Zoom uh share
screen
okay ah
still why is it not as soon as I do this
it
stops oh I can do it by hand okay sorry
so so here I am so last couple years or
so I've been returning to psych analysis
uh still kind of intrigued to find there
plenty of opposite position out there
plenty of the the kind of health care
that's given to mental health care
that's given to patients just doesn't
involve it uh Al all sorts of emphasis
on cognitive behavioral therapy and uh
other
modalities I'm still intrigued to find I
mean something that you know when you
kind of start off you tend to align
yourself with a particular school and
that can become uh you know your
identity is formed in I I was interested
in this French style Jac laon's school
and you tend to see everybody else as
the opposite in some sense so it's been
great to have a certain freedom to to
read Around uh yeah as I said confusion
of tongues but there's a awful lot in
common I mean you just hear these
resonances between these different
approaches so I'm quite intrigued by by
that and and new approaches that that
are happening um yeah I mean back in if
you if you if you read Freud it's it's
sort of you know it's a bit like you're
unpeeling these layers the unconscious
sort of comes along with these layers
and you're you're kind of working like
as an archaeologist and you're working
your way back and you're wondering you
know what does this mean what what does
this discovery back at layer 63 mean or
or or whatever in terms of the psyche of
the patient um it's probably shifted
quite a bit there's a lot more Focus
these days on this sort of interactive
dynamics of the relation between the the
patient and the and the analyst quite
intriguing so so I'm more concerned
perhaps with the Here and Now of we're
not kind of referring back always to to
to Childhood necessarily there's perhaps
less emphasis on that more emphasis on
the Here and Now interactions I mean of
course there'll always be reference back
to to earlier times um okay so the
theory grows it's all
um okay so what's this got to do with
mass well when I so after you know
coming out to Paris uh with my four
years of mass behind me naturally enough
the the the French were were were quite
interested to have me coming along
because I mean Lacon was rather famous
for for trying to bring some mathematics
into psychoanalysis I mean here he is uh
here he is in 73 saying a couple of
things so why is he doing it
formalization is our goal our ideal why
because formalization as such is our
mathe it can be fully transmitted and
there's there's the thought you know his
his Great Battle Cry was back to Freud
thinking that Freud's theories have been
misunderstood misinterpreted the the the
radical opening of the unconscious that
he presented have been kind of closed
over by various schools of
psychoanalysis LA on particularly gives
American schools of ego psychology a
very hard time last thing we want to do
is strengthen the ego he says uh so that
they've misrepresented Freud and and the
yeah the troubles that natural language
lends itself to this form of
misinterpretation and Mathematics could
provide an answer because it can be
transmitted and then in that second
quotation is the only teachable
discourse so he's interested right from
the beginning it's right there in the
start 1953 this was one of his you know
big opening foundational papers often
called the Rome discourse mathematical
formalization that inspired Boolean
logic to say nothing of set theory can
bring to The Science Of Human Action the
structure of inter subjective time that
is needed by psych analytic conjecture
if it is to ensure its own
rigor okay so right through his life we
get these intrusions of mathematics into
the theory and yeah a whole range of
other things take place through uh
through his later writings often
invoking Notions of of topology points
set topology uh of fun you a little bit
on the golden ratio appears uh we we
start getting this division of of
topological space like projective plane
and we're dividing it up into the mobile
strip and the disc and this is supposed
to uh sort convey to us the notion of
the the the fantasy as he sees it and
then later later on I won't go into the
details of what it means but the borrow
me and Link you know that thing where
you you see three circles and they
Interlock in in such way that no two if
you take any of the the the third one
away that the two will fall apart but
the three hold themselves together and
he has some Spiel on
that okay so I mean I I a little
disillusioned I mean perhaps not full on
sakal and brickmore the intellectual
impostures book they chose laor as one
of their examples um for this sort of
false use of mathematics um but there's
a pretty critical note through a chunk
of of this article I wrote in 2002 that
at most it's kind of
suggestive uh it's it's kind of you know
it it never gets the grip that you'd
expect the mathematics as as is used in
physics you know it really gets a grip
um you know you can you can use it you
can the maical results mathematical
results you'll prove will will be you
know essential to the work you're doing
as a physicist whereas it doesn't seem
to be the case in in the examples he's
giving uh been funny though coming to us
just looking back to prepare for for
this talk today just to see actually
kind of couple of things propped up um
from I mean you I was kind of reflecting
back on how do I go so I did from math
to psycho analysis and how do I get out
into philosophy well one kind of curious
ingredient there's a bit where where
laon's making play of of this
distinction the distinction that the
intuitionistic Lo logician would would
agree with that there's a difference
between not for all X 5x and there
exists X such that not 5x you know the
the intuitionistic magician wants when
when you when you make the second claim
they want to get their hands on that X
which is not 5x uh rather than just
achieving a contradiction from the
assumption that all X is 5X now L's
using this for different purposes but uh
it was something reading this at the
time that that I started exploring
intuitionistic logic um and that got me
looking
at I can't can't quite remember the
order but you know it's going to be very
useful for me later in life with when
coming to learn about homotopy type
Theory it gets me into um into lbeck and
Scott introduction to categorical logic
and then as he's here let's uh is he
still here Colin um from this I I
remember reading his um uses and abuses
of history of topos which just blew my
mind at the time and and kind of push me
very much in this in the idea of
direction of philosophy and as regard
with regard to category
Theory okay I mean maybe that was just a
rather fluke sort of uh uh bit of
inspiration coming from Lon but you know
it did set me on a certain kind of path
feed into stuff I then do in my masters
in philosophy on looking at the the
different Antics proof theoretic and
topological semantics for
inition so you know strangely enough
kind of important to me maybe more
substantially though um that thing that
was mentioned in the previous slide on
the Bor me and links and it links to
laon's notion of the dimensions actually
something he does say there really
allows me my first publication um
strangely enough um again so I won't go
into the details of what lon's on about
but he's talking about these Dimensions
the imaginary the real and the symbolic
and u uh he's talking at some point as a
ma mathematicians symbolize the
imaginary of the real he says and then
he's also talking about kind of rotating
these three
terms and it occurs me reading so little
later on I mean I'm out there so the the
guy I wrote the the health book with uh
was his family knew lacosh very well he
was from Hungarian extraction um so he
he thrust proof and reputations into my
hands back in Paris and that kind of got
me on this path as well so I'm doing
this for my PhD I'm I'm reading you know
obviously reading lacos a lot um and it
occurs to me that the problem laos's
problem is that he the thing he's
worried about is that there is an
intuition a mathematical intuition and
then when it comes to
formalization uh codification in axioms
there is the big danger that you have
missed out you've lost some of the
intuition some of the intuitive
understanding has been lost and then
once it's set in place this
symbolization it's lost
forever okay so this is a really
dangerous process in some sense I mean
you know it's necessary but it's kind of
dangerous you're going to lose this
what's happened before and the whole
thrust of this first article of mine
later appears in the 2003 book of mine
um is that this isn't the whole story
and and that if you rotate them round
then then there's a
um there there's a there's a real from
the symbolic if you like the symbolic
itself becomes the platform for a new
real the the space of kind of
possibility and impossibility generated
by the symbolic which then the maeti
then has to imagine so you kind of
rotate these things around so I mean I
don't say it in the article but it was
very directly inspired by laal
strangely okay so what now so amazingly
enough there I was a couple years ago um
so so so there I am in in what am I
around about 25 26 or something and um
I'm reading a lot of category theoretic
logic reading Collin's work and and
fascinated by toppos Theory uh and so
interested in Lac on too amazingly
enough um you know a couple of years ago
here's Alan K so the the French field
medalist the the guy famous for non
commutative
geometry produces a book with a a
psychoanalyst colleague you in the
shadow of Gren Deacon laor I mean my God
these two these two things that were
looming so large for me back at that
time and here he is coming up with the
claim so this is uh if anyone knows
Lacon this is this is clearly a play on
that so laon said the unconscious is
structured like a language and and and
his his group PA saying no no the
unconscious structured as a
topos now I didn't I find the book of
Tad disappointing it it go you know so
con is trying to help us understand what
what a topos is and uh you where's the
big link to
psychoanalysis
um well it seems to be coming through
I'm I'm going to flesh it out a little
bit as I say it's a tad frustrating what
he's trying to do there he's trying to
tell us so he's interested in the the
the the logical Dimension to the top of
um and he's explaining the idea that
topos acts as a classifier of a
geometric Theory a particular sub subp
part of
logic so geometric logic is a certain
kind of fragment of
logic um and a topus is acting as a
classifier of of a geometric Theory and
he's trying to relate it to what Lon
calls the the the fundamental fantasy or
fantasm in
French unfortunately doesn't really get
exp explored enough what he means by
that um
just to give an idea what whaton mean by
that I me that thought is not foreign to
to to a lot of Psych psychon analytic
schools that you can often condense when
when you kind of come to the end of a
case there's almost there's almost a a
single schema by which the patient has
organized their life okay in terms of
the way of they relate to the rest of
the world um you know almost Bo boil
could be boiled down almost to a sort of
single proposition or something of that
kind um so here we we have this is
leanian psychoanalyst talking genv Morel
and she's as in that citation the the
fantasy to take this is she's citing
lack on the fantasy to take things up at
the level of interpretation takes on the
function of an axiom that is is
distinguished from the variable laws of
deduction as though it's acting as this
almost sort of constant invariant in the
life of the the psychic life of the
patient um so here I am expanding on on
What's k saying trying trying trying to
link them a little bit um
yeah right again doesn't feel a great
deal more than
suggestive I I'm a bit it kind of a bit
surp you you think at the very least you
would be interested on what changes to
the extent if if you really really do
believe the unconscious was structures
at the top us and to the extent you
think that transformational processes
going on in psychoanalysis you you'd
think con would want to talk about you
know what goes on does the topos to
change does this geometric theory that
is the the foundation of the being of
the patient does that not shift as as
the psycho analytic therapy proceeds
but he doesn't say very
much um yeah I think I perhaps don't
have to oh I think there's a lot more
work to be done on that I mean what what
so what else is possible just just a I
mean the very if you take if you go back
to kind of very mainstream this this
these sort of concepts are very much
shared by all sorts of schools of Psy
analysis and then you can get the feel
that something mathematical is in the
air at the very least and if you take
these three concepts I mean they're you
know they're practically the language of
mathematics I mean splitting there's all
sorts of ways that splitting appears in
math splitting of sequences and so on
projection projectives projection is is
all over the place um just give a sense
of what these these three concepts are
um so splitting uh particularly the
school that could kind kind of comes
after Freud the the British School of
object relations theorist uh yeah the
sort of mental separation of objects
into good and bad parts you know
particularly if you're mly cin sort of
relating to say to the mother the
maternal function The Good Mother the
provider and the bad mother the the
depriva
um and and the the child then having to
deal with this this the good and the bad
the bad sort typically getting kind of
split off from the good and then and
then sort of dealt with defensively in
certain kinds of ways
uh so a lot work of the therapy will be
to to bring about a kind of recognition
if you like in the in the the patient
that the good and the bad can kind of
coexist in the same entity I mean you
know you know putting it in certain sort
of terms as though really it's just the
mother she contains both the good and
the bad so what you so there has to be a
a kind of overcoming of these opposites
should we say this is this is so one way
of understanding the kind of the work of
the therapy um so so along with this is
an idea the pro so projection is an idea
that these sort of the bad the bad bits
the repressed bits the bits that cause
anxiety are kind projected out into the
world okay so plenty of plenty of
analysts are kind of really interested
in that phenomenon when you encounter
something maybe in another person you
see them behaving in a certain way and
there's something there's just an energy
there there's something you just you
just loathe you hate in what they're
doing uh you're not just you're not just
annoyed as though that's just you know
bad form or something the way somebody's
behaving you you know you're really
gripped by the way it you you you hate
what they're doing and whenever
something like that is a foot it's
extraordinarily likely that there's some
something of this projection going on
and you should pay very close attention
to the trait that's really disturbing
you because it's very likely to be kind
of there rather PES in yourself I don't
know if You' ever tried this the things
that really annoy you and other people
are often things that have a bearing on
your own
life
um the the third the projective so
projective identification is kind of
interesting phenomenon where where you
you you take this to an extreme where
you not only now am I finding am I
locating the sort of bad parts of myself
outside but I'm also going about the
business of making it happen I I want to
generate in the other person these bad
traits this is going to reassure me in
my worldview because if I can generate a
certain kind of bad bad behavior I don't
know a kind of Faith faithlessness or
something in a partner or something uh
and I'm doing it through my own my own
work this will this will kind of conf
confirm if you like uh you know the the
kind of infantile Theory that's
governing my life so you it provides a
kind of a way of kind of controlling
your own internal psychic Space by kind
of forcing the other into a certain kind
of
role
um okay so these are the kind of
glimpses of you can sort of see why you
might imagine certain kind of glimpses
of something a little bit mathematical
going on
here get bring it a little bit closer so
so what you're seeing there and the work
of the patient is is the necessity of
overcoming if there anything like that
there's such a sharp split between the
the good and the bad in some sense
necessarily the work will involve an
overcoming of these opposites there' be
some sort of reconciliation somehow in
the psychic
representation um we also see it I mean
God if if i' been daring to read reunion
work back in the back in my 20s I mean
any kind of post any Freudian post
Freudian would have would have torn
their hair out I mean you know they're
so so entrenched to the school divisions
that one wouldn't do that but one of the
freedoms of coming at it from this angle
is one can read this Yan literature and
you find um yeah again there's a lot a
lot of commonality between these schools
so there there's a lot of talk of the of
the tension of opposites so we got these
opposites within us in some sense and
and the key the key is to hold them in
some sense so that one can transcend
them the Transcendent third his his
young the tling to and fro of arguments
and effects represents the Transcendent
function of opposites the confrontation
of the two positions generates a tension
charged with energy and creates a living
third thing not a logical still birth in
accordance with the principal tertium
non dator but a movement out of the
suspension between opposites a living
birth that leads to a new level of being
a new
situation now people reading this from a
uh with a certain kind of background are
going to perhaps they have the you know
Hegel lighting up in their minds um it
does it does
there's some idea and then particularly
through um perhaps through DreamWork or
other kinds of active imagination uh
that something like a symbol will emerge
which will allow for the integration of
the Opposites in in a new third
thing I mean you know every everybody
has had that well not everybody but I
mean people anyone who knows anything
about Hegel you know comes up with that
thought um sounds sounds doesn't it
sound like the hegelian dialectic going
on
now the the one of one of the perhaps
the strangest intellectual phenomena
I've ever experienced I think is is
watching this colleague of mine so o
shriber mathematical physicist for
interested in category three he just got
gripped by Hegel science of logic for
for a certain period and um he was
taking up um L's work on on translating
uh uh the Hegel alung the the
Transcendence the raising the alabon
relation where you you take a opposites
I Andre talked about the unity of
opposites so you have these opposites
and you put them into this adjoint
relationship to each other and and
transcend in some sense up some kind of
ladder
um so L had done this uh as a means to
understanding um what out of you can do
this way out of the opposition between
between a sort of being a nothing a zero
and a one if you like out of this you
can generate using this this this this
alha haben um methodology uh some notion
of an opposition between discreetness
and continuity so C sorry C-
discreetness and and discreetness
discreetness where you've got a you know
bag of dots and they're all separate
from each other and co- discreetness
where you you got your bag of dots but
they're all connected to each other so
these now lie in opposition to each
other and in some sense they've resolved
the opposition between the zero and the
one if you if you follow through the the
the mathematics of it
and you can take that ladder up and up
and up and and and Earth does this to uh
to to to bring in not just the the
cohesion that's needed to understand
things topologically spatially uh and
then on we go to understanding things
differentially in terms of their smooth
structure and then you can take it on
yet further to to bring in the the super
geometry uh that he's going to need you
know to to codify Modern
physics okay so kind of curious kind of
resonance is there um whether there's a
genuine pathway through is is another
matter between the the the said the
mathematics of of um adjunctions and and
what's going on uh is
another excludes himself from from from
being counting as a hegelian but here he
is somebody pointing out Hegel
nevertheless seems to be the only one
who could provide
um to Union psychology the kind of logic
with which alone it could truly
comprehend and say what it has to
say now just to finish so the there I'm
probably only offering you the most the
most sort of suggestive residences where
something one could begin to do
something I think you know somebody gave
me a lot of money and just let me S
think for for a long time something I
might want to pursue is is what I've got
here on my final slide let me just
finish with these
thoughts so again yeah so it's a curious
thing going through the psychoanalytic
literature because you're kind of sim
there similarities and yet there
differences all over the place it's it's
it's it's very curious and yet you sort
of get the feeling they're talking about
the same thing and yet they seem to be
phrasing things in really quite
radically different ways yeah it's like
we need a kind of computational
trinitarianism but for for psycho
analysis maybe um so one fairly recent
somebody very much identifies himself in
the Freudian tradition and and yet in
the very Act of what he then does is to
he he and there's various work that's
gone on in psychology of um the
emotional systems the emotional drives
particularly the emotional drives that
correspond and speak about our
relatedness to other people um so one of
the psychologists like PP so on you know
and they're looking even for
neurological groundings of these
emotional systems um so to do with fear
and and rage and caring and attachment
and so on and and and even things like
play and the the drive to seek uh to go
on a quest in various kind of ways and
last um so these phomes These are these
are seven emotional drives I mean
already you know it's kind of gone post
Freudian in the sense that Freud seems
to want to relate everything back to the
the single sexual drive unless you count
the death drive but you know it's
already Post frud in in the sense that
those object relations people seem to
have they generate all that kind of work
on attachment Theory so there seems like
there's a kind of other emotional drives
coming in and SS kind of does this work
on the the seven
drives and is then intrigued by the way
that um you know they can't be sort of
resolved
simultaneously you know the kind of
worse you are in some sense in terms of
your mental health the less able you are
to to find any kind of way of
reconciling your seven drives um you
know so so famously there's a there's a
the kind of person who you know
desperately seeks intimacy with another
person but as soon as they do this as
soon as somebody sort of has let into
their lives that uh they must be
rejected because there's there's some
kind of fear that you know violence to
them or or Fe maybe fear of some sort of
psychic absorption into the other person
anyway there some sort of fear or anger
is is generated in them by by this
proximity so it's as though you've got
these sort of two two drives in kind of
conflict with each other and they both
can't be satisfied so it's like this
High dimensional space you're kind of
negating your way around um and you know
sadly
because of the way we're constructed
it's as though we had to resolve these
find our strategies and our policies for
kind of spping around this space from a
very early age uh when we're not in any
kind of way shape or form to to learn
the right strategies to move around the
space so we get this idea of a premature
autom automatization is a way of dealing
with the with with our systems being
kind of out of out of kilter which then
often persist into later lives and we
fall back on these these rather faulty
strategies in some sense so the kind of
work of analysis is to is to sort of
come back and remove or or or perhaps
not remove but modify in some sense the
the the space of the kind of policies by
which you navigate your
space okay so This Ss is interesting
he's he's I don't know if you know about
the the the world of active inference SL
predictive processing slash free energy
principle so SS is cly talking to
friston on that and a bunch of other
people um and again we have a link back
to category Theory there's there's
plenty of people well not plenty but
there's certainly people very interested
in this community I mentioned before as
I said hopefully well I am about to join
at least for for a year and apply
category Theory uh and the people there
trying to trying to understand um using
a play category Theory this this active
inference and right there's some really
kind of interesting stuff going on
around I don't if you so if you follow
the apply category Theory world there's
there's a lot of work on dynamical
systems in a categorical sense
categorical systems theory you're seeing
that in the work of of David SPAC and
and others
um and so Toby smile is trying to get a
kind of structural structured active
inference to kind of wrap this into to
uh to to to yeah so so categor
categorical system Seri rep is is is
providing the kind of groundwork for
this structured active
inference and there kind of feels to me
there's a sort of the pathways through
there to think about
particularly the so B fin out the you
know they're really analysts really see
psych analyst are really seeing you know
don't don't look at the individual as a
unified mind there's this there like
there's a sort of Committee of people in
there almost there's there's there lot
of there different voices in there they
kind there's competition if you like
inside the the psyche um so there's all
sorts of intra intas psychic
intrapersonal Dynamics going on and then
bring that person into relation with
somebody else maybe the analyst but but
the the familiar people in somebody's
life and things get yet more complicated
in all sorts of ways um anyway I have
some hopes there that one could push
something along in that direction but as
I said all all I can offer is is rather
speculative at the moment sadly but you
know who knows if we keep on thinking
about these things at which point I I
shall finish and thanks very much for
for
listening thank you so much l that was
great we just need one second to set up
for Rocky who's in
person some slide deck change over yeah
people online hear
this can people out there or can you
hear my voice that sounds good okay
great test test
if yeah if people can hear me in um in
house then that's fine if that
works e
okay great um all right uh well yeah uh
first off thanks to uh Eric and Connor
for organizing this uh thanks to the
other presenters and everyone who's here
both online and in person um the basic
idea of this talk is to provide uh I
think a nice um
intuitive case of the
utility of category theory for modeling
certain complex phenomena and in
particular the use of uh an elementary
category Theory construction called uh
pre- sheaves so uh the task here is
basically to model autopoetic systems so
systems that construct and reconstruct
themselves using
prees uh and this is collaborative work
um
oops okay um this is collaborative work
with uh a couple of colleagues of mine
John Luka Katarina and Fernando to we've
worked together for uh quite some time
now on a variety of uh research programs
linked to category Theory and various
modeling um much of which uses prees in
various various ways um so to open
things
up oh
damn sorry I need a little technical
help
here how do I just can't if can I
navigate with there it is okay go all
right um
so to start with a uh a quote from a
Wallace Stevens poem The Ultimate poem
is
abstract um and two things to note here
one um that the the kind of poetic
program that Stevens is uh proposing
here is I think uh closely linked to
people like Mal uh it's kind of
quintessential poetic modernism um and
this is uh quite close in spirit I think
to the project of modernism in
mathematics in particular the
development to set theory and then from
set theory to category Theory a nice
reference here is the book by Jeremy
gray Plato's ghost where he tries to
link or or interpret um 20th century
mathematics in terms of cultural
modernism so that's some kind of
interplay between uh the Arts and and
Mathematics here uh but also in terms of
the content part of what makes
autopoetic systems very interesting and
complicated is that they probe their
environments and modify themselves they
don't just repeat themselves but they
change right they ask questions and this
is especially difficult when we're
trying to produce a formal model of a
system to get a formal model that's
robust enough to uh be subjected to
various kinds of alterations and
creative um
exponentiations uh so to begin uh an
image from uh a an ancient
diagrammatic text uh this is from The
Alchemist Cleopatra of Alexandria um we
have a copy of of a onepage kind of
alchemical uh Treatise from maybe the
10th or 11th century and this is uh the
serpent or uh dragon or a boros right
the the the snake that eats its own tail
uh and one of the things I like about
this image is it gives us a way of
thinking of Duality which is an
important concept in category Theory we
think of the snake eating its tail
consuming itself but if you turn things
around you could think of the snake's
head is spilling out of its tail Right
Moving in the other direction and thus
constructing
itself uh and if we take this kind of uh
ancient image as a guide right we
convert it categorically into something
like this this is a nice simple
straightforward category we call it s uh
it has one object which we also call s
um and uh we have one non-identity
morphism so every object is equipped
with an identity morphism in category
Theory but now we have um an additional
morphism or Arrow labeled Sigma and we
think of this as a path from s to itself
and we allow Sigma to freely generate
all of the paths in other words all of
the iterations of s itself so we have
Sigma Sigma Sigma Sigma Sigma Sigma and
so on uh so this is our category and
what we're interested in is a
prief nice um which is assigning to this
category a set for each object and a
function between sets corresponding to
each morphism in this case we only have
the one object so we call our prief our
funter F uh and we have F of s which is
an arbitrary set and to Sigma F will
assign an arbitrary function from F of s
to itself right and then of course we
can iterate F of Sigma as many times as
we like corresponding to the iterations
of
Sigma and if we think about what F of
Sigma looks like from the inside right
we can construct a kind of internal
diagram um and this is very familiar
familar to those of you who have U maybe
worked with dynamical systems right in
fact a prief over our category s is just
a discrete dynamical system um
deterministic discrete dynamical system
so we can think of each element of the
set has exactly one Arrow Which F of
Sigma assigns to that element taking it
to some other
element and if we isolate the the
topmost element in our set here uh and
call it P
as so and we kind of zoom in on P you'll
notice that P inside the internal
diagram looks like this it's a kind of
microcosm of our original category uh
but with the difference that F of Sigma
of
P when iterated just takes us back to P
every time in other words p is a fixed
point for the function f of Sigma um and
in general fixed points are very
important in discrete dynamical systems
they represent equilibrium States um and
these are very important when we think
about the Dynamics of um systems in in
economics physical systems uh in logic
uh and so on but this isn't really the
even though fix points are very
important for modeling autopoetic
systems it's really not the concept that
we want what we want is something closer
to
idempotence so
idempotence is analogous to a fixed
point but it's a property of functions
or operations themselves right a fixed
Point uh has the
property uh F of P equals P under the
operation f idempotence is defined such
that applying F to
any
argument more than once gives the same
result as applying it once so F of f ofx
will be equal to F ofx for all X and
using a kind of suggestive notation um
we can eliminate the X and say something
like f applied to itself returns F right
and in fact that's a a notation that
actually makes sense uh in in an a
system like combinatory logic where
operations operate on other operations
including themselves so idempotence is
closer to what we want um but uh as
written there on the right hand side um
autop pois is not just iterated identity
but iterated structural equivalence in
other words we want F of f to spit back
F but potentially with some difference
right and so I've notated that here by
by saying as we as we sort of extend to
the left we want um starting from the
right F Sigma of s
applying to that value some new
operation fime that might be generated
somehow by the value of f Sigma of s
that F Prime of Sigma applied to that
and then some f double Prime in other
words the operation should be quasi
epitent as we continue to apply it uh we
we get a similar result a structurally
equivalent result in some sense but it
should be able to update itself right
and so in order to capture this more
subtle Dynamic uh we need to move up a
level to categories of pre sheeps so
here uh we take our pre sheef F ofs and
we embed it in the category of all such
prees so this is a topos right the
object of this category uh is going to
be a prief from s into set um or sop
into set which just means we reverse the
arrow here that's that's uh not
important um and then the morphisms of
this category are what are called
natural
Transformations between prees so these
are uh ways of taking
the uh the sets that are assigned to
each object in the category and
assigning them through functions to
other sets in another pree in a way that
preserves the structure in this case um
if you take F of Sigma if you pick some
element in F of s update it to F of
Sigma and then follow the red arrow that
will take you to the same element in
fime of Sigma as if you follow the red
arrow and then update with fime
Sigma don't worry if that sounds
confusing confusing just know that a
natural transformation is a structure
preserving map between
prees and then um what we've developed
in order to try to capture
this uh sort of uniquely
self-transforming character of
autopoetic systems uh is what we call a
Spyro
morphism uh and the actual construction
is is a little bit technical uh but the
basic idea is simply to associate with
certain
critical elements in a given pre- sheet
think of these as elements that matter
right in which some kind of creative
moment takes place uh we associate to
those system states morphisms that is
natural Transformations between prees so
this allows us to not just update from
System state to System state following
the um uh the operation of the dynamical
system but to update the entire
dynamical system
itself all right um but of course this
isn't the whole story right when we're
thinking about autopoetic systems um
we're thinking of a picture more like
eers hands drawing one another right a
system
exists um at least in the real world in
relationship and interaction with its
environment and just as the environment
is imposing structure on the system the
system system is capable of modifying
its environment right so the the
autopoetic loop goes one level up and is
now happening within the system but also
between the system and the
environment and so uh in order to try to
capture this we work with uh an
expanded category that we call es so now
we have two objects still relatively
simple um think of them our our old
category s with its morphism Sigma but
now we have an environment modeled by
the object e with an update function on
E called
to and now between e and s we have
morphisms going in each direction that
we label tell think Tey and debt think
determination and because a prief is a
contravariant functor which means the
the morphisms reverse their Direction
when we take a prief tell is going to be
going going from F of s to F of e so Tey
here is going to be going in a sense
from the system picking out an optimal
state in the environment and
determination is going to take a state
of the environment and give a
determination of the system so the
arrows seem to be going in the wrong
direction but that'll go right in the in
the preet so the morphisms now um just
as in the previous example are freely
generated so not not only do we have
Sigma and tell and Deb and to but we
have all possible paths so we have too
followed by tell we have to followed by
tell followed by debt followed by to and
so
on and we're interested in
prees over this category right so again
we assign to each object in our category
a set so now we have F of E and F of s
um and we assign to each of our
morphisms in the base category a
function between sets and in this case
they go in the opposite direction so you
can see we have Fel FD ft F Sigma and
all of the corresponding
paths um and this gives us a way to
think about interactions between system
and
environment um and the simplest case the
one that becomes almost trivial is what
we call uh stct system environment
concordance uh and this is uh determined
by these identities um or or
inequalities represented on the left um
and this just means that
the state of the environment always
uniquely determines a system State and
the system State returns by way of Fel
to exactly that same environment state
so think of this as a kind of Servo
mechanism the system is being complet
driven and determined by the environment
um but you can still Model A lot of
interesting things under this condition
of of concordance a really nice example
comes from John V noyon um who did the
pioneering work with Cellular automa in
the late 40s uh that was then kind of
finally published uh a decade or so
later by a colleague uh
Burks um but what what vyon did he
developed the notion of a cellular
automaton which is just a discreet
dynamic IAL system uh you might have
heard of like Conway's Game of Life
think of a um uh a an array of
pixels kind of an infinite array of of
of square uh cells and then you have
some of them colored in some of them
empty or maybe they have different
colors uh and then you just have some
kind of update function that tells you
well if this um cell has a certain
number of neighbors of a certain type in
a certain configuration you update it to
some other
state um and what Von noyon was able to
do is build a cellular automaton a
relatively complicated one such that
with within the context of that cellular
automatone he could Define what he
called a universal
Constructor and Universal Constructor is
essentially a kind of mini touring
machine that takes as input a uh an
input tape uh and then can output based
on the coding of the tape an arbitrary
uh arrangement of cells in the cellular
automaton you can essentially draw
anything that you tell it to within the
cellular automaton and then what becomes
autopoetic is um you can then use the
universal Constructor to under the
right input tape produce a copy of
itself so it draws a copy of itself
which then under the operations of the
automata will perform the operation
again and so on and so on so it produces
infinite copies of itself together with
its tape blueprint so it can copy itself
the important Point here is even though
it looks as if the universal Constructor
is doing something autonomously right if
you watch a visual um representation of
this you'll you'll see the little shape
and it actually looks like it's building
a copy of itself but in fact everything
that it's doing
is completely determined by the rules of
the more General cell cellular automaton
that's determined by Von noon um so at
the end of the day this means that the
system s is really just a kind of subset
of the system e right really you just
have one updated system where you can if
you want to pick out a part of it that
looks like it's doing its own thing the
more interesting case is when there's
Divergence right so basically the system
can diverge from its environment in two
ways if um if you if you look at the um
the graphical diagram here F of e
represents the environment so right now
assume that it's in statement uh System
state green right well that means
following F debt that it will determine
our system FS to be in state yellow
right so green green is determining
yellow well if we had concordance then F
of yellow would take us back to
green but in this case you'll notice
that um the update function f Sigma of
yellow takes us to something different
from if you follow green updated F tow
right followed by F de in other words if
we interpret this if we allow the
environment to run under its
update conditions we'll end up with our
system in the state at the lower right
but if the system were allowed to be
autonomous and do its own thing
following Sigma it would take us to u f
Sigma of yellow so notice that that
dashed Green Line represents a
Divergence right the emergence of a
difference between
what would happen under the update F
Sigma and what would happen under the
update ft followed by
Deb the other way that the system can
diverge is by way of
theological uh representation tell so
each system state has an F so now we
have yellow F of yellow is not the same
as uh green
in other words under our uh
interpretation yellow would prefer to be
in F of yellow that environment state
would have some kind of
preferential relationship to the system
uh that is not provided by Green right
so think of yellow as wanting that
different state and so if we compose Fel
followed by FD of Fel we end up
following the dashed yellow yellow arrow
where in some sense uh the system in
state yellow would like to be and again
notice that that's a different kind of
Divergence so we have two now different
ways in which the system under its own
update function can diverge from what
the environment is determining the
system to do so the question or the
problem is how do we bring the these two
different kinds of possible Divergence
into the model so that they can possibly
update the entire system environment
interactions in a way that would
correspond to autonomy andology and this
is where as we uh did earlier we move up
a level to the category of pre- shees
over this category so now our objects
are the prees themselves call them f f
Prime F double Prime
um and the morphisms are the natural
Transformations between these
prees
um in this
context Spyro morphisms then become
roughly speaking right again the
technical details are are a little bit
tricky roughly speaking we're taking
pairs of States one from the environment
and one from the system and then based
on these divergences that can be defined
through the debt and tell functions
right the ways that and here here the
two yellow or the two red States one in
the environment and one in the system
the ways that they might diverge
internally through debt Andel that
modality of Divergence will then
determine a natural transformation right
a kind of update function of the system
and the environment and their
interactions as a whole right and that
gives us flexibility to talk about many
different ways that the system
environment interaction can redirect
itself based on what the system wants in
the sense of the tell function um and
what it um self-d determines
autonomously in terms of its own uh
Sigma
function um so what's what's the upshot
according to this model which is is I
think quite General in the sense that it
can cover a lot of
ground um what what matters is always a
kind of interplay between causal
determination that's coming essentially
from the environment and some kind of
teologico or um a a break with is in the
direction of a that deter that is
determined primarily by the system um
and the kinds of
applications for this for modeling this
this interplay uh I think is quite
diverse uh David corfield mentioned uh
active inference program of uh Carl
friston and others I think that would be
one uh place where where this Dynamic
can be recognized uh in the work of uh
Nikos Luman um there's uh explicit
reference to poetic systems through
communication and the use of uh George
Spencer Brown's uh formal calculus the
re-entry of the form this
um uh this application to Sociology
seems to involve this dynamic between
determination and freedom or autonomy um
might also think about the um the I
think very interesting work by Roberto
mangaba anger Brazilian political
theorist
uh who attempts to uh
critique both uh liberal democracy and
also social democracy in the kind of
let's say the Scandinavian mode in order
to think a kind of radical
experimental um self-updating mode of
society and politics I think anger
explicitly wants to um kind of uh um
raise the temperature of the ability of
social and political institutions to not
just update themselves say through
voting but to update their own manner of
updating right which is again the uh the
core idea of the model um was also I
think very nice work by an franois
Schmidt uh in in France um she's
developed the idea of generic
epistemology which is a way to think
about knowledge relations um that are
specifically uh abstracted from the
concrete domains where they originate so
is to be able to um organize uh formal
Bridges right that would be creative and
constructive right so thinking about
ways that uh developments say in um
cellular biology and developments in
computer science which might seem a
prior to be very different Sciences uh
can actually mutually inform one another
in a creative way if you think about
something like synthetic biology um and
then a colleague of of Schmidt um at the
at Perry mean uh Armand hatchu has
developed a nice application of the
mathematics of
forcing um in design Theory U it's
called concept knowledge design Theory
and I think it's also a similar dynamic
in terms of uh industrial design you're
you're constrained by materials by
physics by technology um in the process
of design right but you also work within
various degrees of of Freedom if you're
trying to build an engine right your
engine has to work uh it needs fuel and
so forth but you're also free to make it
larger smaller uh to produce um you know
more or less cylinders and so this this
inter play in design work between the
degrees of constraint and the degrees of
freedom I think is captured by this um
by this model uh and then in terms of
the actual question like what's the um
kind mechanism inside this um spom
morphism Dynamic like how do we actually
assign the values to the Natural
Transformations based on the system and
environment structures basically um what
we're using is a kind of game
theoretical
Dynamics um in which classes of
strategies for the
update somehow move
between polls of interdependence so
think of um on on one poll of of
strategic development there would be a
maximizing um couplings between the
system and the environment this would be
very close in spirit in biology to Niche
construction so think about a species
that um behaves in such a way that the
environment is changed by that behavior
in a way that is um conducive to the
survival and reproduction of that
species say but you know territorial
markings by a certain species um or
something like this so that would be the
poll of
interdependence the other pole The Other
Extreme would be maximizing system
autonomy so trying to develop this is
this would be primarily through the
updating of the the sigma function uh
ways in which
the system remains robust under its own
Dynamics um regardless of perturbations
in the environment so think of this as a
you know maybe a cell that constructs a
very very tough membrane so that even if
things are changing um in the in the
ambient uh environment the cell Dynamics
within the cell can remain more or less
the same right and then the key Point
here is that we don't think of these as
Alternatives but rather
polarities such that any strategy right
any autopoetic
updating is always some way of
composing modes of interdependence with
modes of autonomy in a way that is
something like a wager or a gamble on
what will
maximize the system under its autopoetic
continuous so um to return to or boros
uh thanks a
lot yeah think yeah thanks everybody
we're taking an hour break
so see you at 1 pm Eastern
Time e
just going to wait a couple minutes for
people to trickle in from
outside it's very hot in this room for
all on Zoom
just it's very
fluxus
extremely why when Mass Unis moved in
there there was no climate control of
any kind
I guess he didn't literally move into
the building you're in
go for
hey everybody welcome
back um we're starting off uh this
afternoon's program with uh Matt tikman
he's a programming specialist at the
digital library Development Center at
the University of Chicago where he
builds software for digital archiving
and does full stack web development his
main interests are functional
Programming type Theory natural language
semantics and feminist
philosophy he also is the host for
elucidations podcast
uh Matt take it away thank you I'm gonna
go ahead and share my screen get my
slides going
here okay everybody can see the
slides I'll take that as a yes uh so
greetings from
California um I uh today would like to
talk uh to everybody about modularity um
and I'm going to spell what that means
um and I'm referring to this certain
like um folk WI that's been passed down
through the last 25 years of software
developer uh software developers in
Industry uh due to the rise of agile
programming and I mean it it goes it
traces back before that too but it
really kicked off that J programming
early 2000s mid 2000s uh books such as
clean code by Uncle Bob Maron uh agile
Manifesto Etc um and I am very
sympathetic to um this um to this
approach uh just a minute everybody I'm
going
to fix my zoom control oops fix my zoom
controls for a sec here they're blocking
my view of my own presentation okay I
think that's
better uh so I mostly agree with the uh
with what the agile people uh think and
my goal today is to just sort of unpack
it sort of figure out what what are they
really getting at so um here is a sneak
peek at what I will argue in this
presentation so I'm going to uh try to
say that modular code modular software
is code that begins that builds exactly
what it needs from scratch in small
increments um and I think uh
philosophical arguments are exactly like
code in this way so they benefit from
modularity in the same way for the same
reasons that software
does um and but there is a problem which
I will talk about with modular code and
I think that same problem carries over
to philosophical arguments that's a
sneak peek so um what do I mean by
modularity um well that's tricky to pin
down precisely but let me just start
with an example the example I'm going to
use is rout
13 so rout 13 if you haven't come across
it before is a special case of the
Caesar Cipher which became popular in
uset groups of the 80s uh for people who
wanted to talk about movie spoilers and
but hide what they were saying about the
movies from people who didn't want to
have the you know hadn't seen the movie
yet want to get spoiled so um you know
start from start with some text this is
how r t works and I just took a you know
your classic Banger from Martin L here
every mathematical object is of a
certain kind of type all right so if I
want to rot 13 scramble that all I'm
going to do is I'm going to advance
every letter 13 letters ahead in the
alphabet if I hit Z I'm going to loop
back around to a so that's the that's
the r 13 algorithm very simple and it's
a way of uh temporarily hiding text from
people so they can't read it but then
they there's also an easy way for them
to get the text back because you just
rotate the letters you rotate each
alphabetic letter 13 letters ahead again
and you get your original thing
back so it's it's the it's the symmetric
Caesar
Cipher um so um here is some nasty s
code that I wrote O camel um if you're
wondering why I wrote an O camel uh the
answer is simple it's my favorite
programming language and you only live
once so why not use your favorite
programming language uh so this is some
nasty code I wrote Noam what I'm going
to do is I'm going to progressively make
it less and less nasty uh to try to
bring out what the good making feature
of modular code is so um anyway here's
here's some code I'm gonna talk more
about it here's how it behaves so you do
R 13 on high you get of R 13 on how are
you you get OB
your uh if you do it on stuff with
capitalization punctuation it's going to
respect the capitalization but ignore
the white space and punctuation ignore
if you give it nothing but stuff it's
going to ignore it's going to ignore
everything and so too for this example
so that's the behavior of the r 13
algorithm and the folk wisdom from the
agile folks like Uncle Bob is that this
type of code is a problematic because
it's trying to do too many things at
once it doesn't just have one job it has
like a million jobs and it's mixing them
together um so the thing what you the
thing you want to do to fix code like
this um that's kind of ugly is Factor
off parts of the logic into into
intermediate steps and then such each
step you factor off has has one job
instead of 50 so here's the code I you
know in a little nasty little bit of
emical I just wrote to uh do rout 13 um
here's the part this antic to this
conditional expression here is uh what's
going to check for if the character this
sorry this is the part that's going to
look at each character this is the part
that's going to check whether the
character that you're on is uppercase or
not and it's going to rotate accordingly
if it's uppercase versus lowercase so
what we can do is we can factor that off
into a helper function we can just say
here's the code to check if a character
is uppercase that a function and you
give this you give that function any
character it's going to tell you whether
or not that character is uppercase make
it a helper function for the code and
now suddenly look at that antic to that
conditional so much easier to read now
is it not it's checking if the input
character is uppercase much easier to
look at than the Big Blob of code
greater than or equals to blah blah blah
blah blah that we had
before um while we're at it there's a
second uh nested conditional in here
that also checks if uh the input
character is lowercase let's factor that
off too so now we did two refactors
from the original
code and I'm just going to assume that
modular means in some Loosey Goosey
sense of the term to be nailed down uh
maximally refactor so you factor off
everything that is let's just say
reasonable to
refactor um so that you know the the
clean code ADW folks um want us to uh
want to do this as much as we can and
they areg that gives us the following
perks this is what uh you know you start
a software Dev job and your manager is
gonna it's G to they're gonna start
telling you this stuff
uh so uh uh all this refactory makes the
code easier to understand perk number
one perk number two makes the code
easier to change perk number three it
makes the code easier to test debug perk
number four it makes the code reusable
or makes some parts of your code
reusable whereas before zero was
reusable so let's just like take a look
at that example and think about how it
has those perks so we already noted that
it's easier to understand the antecedent
of the conditional the two NE two
conditionals here
uh you know if we Factor off uh the
Boolean that appears in them into a
function because we can now see oh first
we're checking if the character's
uppercase then we're checking the
characters lower case much easier to
read so that's that's in a nutshell how
we get readability out of this
extensibility well let's say I'm just
going to make up let's say we wanted to
add a feature to Rod 13 here and we
wanted to rotate not just alphabetic
characters but also digits well what
would we do I
mean the the straightforward thing to do
would just be like the pattern we have
now add another helper function in here
check if the character is a digit and
then add another nested conditional down
the bottom to check to perform that
check which you defined above F the same
structure that already suggested itself
from the first refactor of the uh into
into his uppercase and his lower case so
the the minut we start refactoring that
suggests a way of extending the features
of the code we had
before easier to fix well how is this
easier to fix imagine that a um oh yeah
sorry first I'm going to so these are
like local functions which if you're not
a programmer what this means is that is
uppercase and is lower case these are
secret to the whole rest of the code
except for the r 13 function only the r
three function knows about them but we
pull them into Global scope now
everything in this file that occurs
after his uppercase and after his lower
case everything this file after them now
can now knows about them so that's just
another Global scope put pulling that
I'm going to consider local and Global
to be mostly equivalent except for this
fact so he pulled them on the global
scope and now we can start testing them
in The Interpreter so now imagine a
hacker comes along
and see you see what I broke the code
there imagine the hacker comes along
gets on my computer and breaks the code
and I come in the next morning I'm like
dude what's going on with my R 13 code
I'm supposed to I try to R 13 Jackal up
it doesn't R 13 anything it just keeps
Jackalope what's going on well in this
situation I can use the predicate that I
factored off to help with testing so
let's let's test is a lower case works
ah what do you know it thinks that
lowercase a is not lowercase oh it also
thinks lowercase j is not lowercase oh
wait it thinks asky bill character is
lowercase that's clearly messed up let
now now let's go look at the code for
his
lowercase ah well there you go we can
see it's checking in the wrong character
range it's checking the 26 letters
starting with ASI Bell rather than 26
letters ahead starting with ASI
lowercase a so we just changed the seven
in there sevens in there to 97s and now
we fixed the code so the takeaway here
is that the refactor allows us to um
check for bugs in particular places and
not just all at once we can check for
bugs in parts of the code rather than
having to check for bugs in the whole
blob and AD just accordingly this really
helps if you you know if you're a
software developer you've probably
experienced this really helps uh you
find bugs
faster so reusability um the fourth
commonly cited perk of mod modular code
is that it is reusable so
um uh and I think the the two refactors
we did here are indicative of that so we
have we now have a you know really
general purpose functions to check
whether a character is uppercase or
lowercase and um you know if you're not
a developer maybe you haven't
experienced this but if you are a
developer you got to check whether
characters are uppercase and lower case
like 24 hours a day this is not Rod 13
is not the only time that this is going
to come up so that makes these two
functions good candidates for promotion
into a general purpose library and
now the fact that we took the part of
the code which was just in the middle of
a blob that was checking whether the a
character was uppercase checking whether
it was lowcase we pulled that out into a
separate thing the fact that we did that
now means that later on when we're
writing some other code not having
anything to do with rot 13 we don't have
to rewrite that code again like 50
different times we just read it in one
place and we use it wherever we need it
so that's the argument for why modular
code is more
reusable so it's more uh intelligible
fixable changeable and reusable those
these this is the this is the folk
wisdom uh you know coming out of the
agile movement especially or you know uh
influentially put forth by the agile
movement about how you should how you
should make your code and this is the uh
this is what um you know Junior
developers are instructed to do um so
I'm going to cycle back to haha get it
cycle back I'm gonna cycle back to rot
13 in a minute but before cycling back
to rot 13 I want to now pause to um draw
parallel with philosophy so I think
philosophical arguments work the same
way as
code so and in fact if you track open
any classic work of philosophy at least
any classic work of philosophy that is
the business of making arguments I think
that's actually kind of not every work
of philosophy but it's like I don't know
it's like more than half of them
probably it's like a lot of them very
common making arguments of philosophy
um uh and you just see any any any
argument-based work in philosophy is GNA
be refactoring right and left um and I
don't usually see it talk about in those
terms but I see it happening all over
the place um and here's the way it works
in philosophy and I think it's very
similar to the way it works in code so
you know you're sitting there you're
like you're on your paretic little walk
and you're trying to figure out your
view is about something and the first
draft of your argument for the
conclusion uh that you know that you
that you decided is your view it's going
to be big and complicated involve a lot
of steps little moves um you know little
subparts um but those subparts are not
going to be um separated out they're
going to they're all going to occur into
a big jumble and then you you're GNA get
home from your paretic walk and you're
gonna write down your notes of like what
your argument is and it's going to be
like maybe their argument is good like
it's a valid argument but it but the
everything's going to be sort of tied up
together and what you see you know more
often than not in like the first draft
of a philosophical argument is the every
single view the person has about
absolutely everything kind of gets
rolled up inside of this
argument um and then another thing you
commonly see you sort of a life life
cycle of you know multiple drafts of
workshopping a philosophical argument is
you see the person starts to pull things
out of it um they start to factor off
sub arguments and then refine those
things separately which turns out to be
much easier than refining them when
they're in the middle of a Big Blob
would have been um so I'm just going to
give you a very simple example um I
decided not to give you any
um really classic examples from the can
because they're too complicated uh but
here's just a very very oversimplified
example just so you can see what the
refactoring looks like in the falsy case
so I'm just going to give you an
argument with like letters in it and I'm
going to change it into an argument with
words in it so here's the AR here's the
version with letters in it suppose a if
a then B if B then C okay well clearly
you know the conditional is transitive
so um a brings about C and some you know
it brings about as understood as roughly
equivalent to if if then um anything
that brings about C should be avoided
therefore a should be avoided so this is
the kind of thing you know you crack
open a philosopy paper you crack on a
philosopy book you get stuff that looks
like this all the
time so this argument isn't too
complicated I deliberately made it like
to be I deliberately made the world's
most simple argument to just be able to
use it as an El an El
example but um uh you can probably
already see from there that the whole
like argument for if they and C or a
brings about C that can be factored off
um and uh I think this is a move that a
lot of people will make when they're
doing the second draft of their argument
they'll be like H all right let's factor
that off and let's discuss that
separately maybe we make it into a
separate chapter maybe we make it into a
paper maybe you know something like that
but like we don't need to be talking
about all these things at the same time
so it'll look more like this and heavily
you know so overse over simplified
schematized form um you'll just have
like the argument for if a then C
that'll work as a Lemma and then you
just invoke it in the main argument and
now you can like argue both of these
arguments separately rather than like
intermixed with each
other um and so my just concrete example
of of an argument that's a bit like this
uh is um David Newark and William
washer's uh book on the minimum wage
so one of the moves they make in the
introduction is they say well previous
literature especially in economics um uh
tries to argue against raising the
minimum wage because um the argument is
that raising the minimum wage causes a
rise in unemployment um and um but what
they want to do is peel the empirical
claim off of that argument um and um
just focus on like what are the effects
of the minimum wage that's really what
the focus is the
book um so let's see what we can learn
from the evidence and then let's you
know in fact actually um unfortunately
from my point of view they do cheat at
the end of the book and in like the very
last chapter they're like okay okay okay
fine we've we've held our tongues and
we're gonna like make some policy
proposals at the end of the book um
that's a little too bad from from my
point of view because I think it's like
really nice the way they like Factor off
the empirical stuff for most of the book
but anyway the uh the Insight is still
there um and the Insight is um it's like
uh gonna just muddle things if we try to
discuss whether there should be a
minimum wage hike at the same time as we
try to discuss what the actual effects
of a minimum W height would be um
another thing I should say here is that
this is a super super super simplified
version of their argument their actual
argument is like very rigorous and
scholarly and detailed and sophisticated
and they talk about way more than just
unemployment so this is just I'm just
giving you a cartoon example to
illustrate uh what like a philosophical
refactor looks
like so um and here once again this is
gonna be like I just want to be clear
I'm not doing any justice to their view
here I'm just sort of using them as an
example you can go look at to think
about in the context of the argument
that I'm making so so you know um the
thought is typically in the previous
literature you'd see an argument like
this suppose minimum wage increases if
minimum wage increases Mass layouts
happen Mass layoffs happen unemployment
increases therefore raising the minimum
wage increases unemployment there
anything that raises unemployment should
be avoided therefore we should not
increase minimum wage that's the sort of
standard thing you would see in previous
literature and then their thought is
like well why don't we just Factor this
part off like you know Factor it off in
the sense of like most of the book we're
just going to discuss
this so um that's my like like little
toy example of philosophical refactoring
and I think just one thing I want to
stress now is that all the virtues of
modular code that we cited for software
carry over to modular philosophical
arguments philosophical arguments that
is that did as much refactoring as they
can so um intelligibility um I think I
think this uh this holds um if you have
a big argument blob that takes place
over multiple Pages it just gets really
hard to assess the individual moves in
it because they're all sort of hang bu
up with each other they're coupled to
each other you have to be thinking about
them all at the same time in order to
assess any individual one whereas in an
argument where whatever can be
refactored off is refactored off you
could just look at the sub arguments
individually and assess them
individually um and even before you get
to assessing just understanding what
they're saying you can do that as well
and I think we all know at this
conference that understanding
philosophical arguments can take work
they can be really hard
um and um a really important part of
understanding the understanding equation
in my um view is thinking about whether
or not you agree with it and like you
know the the moment you're starting to
understand an argument like part of
understanding it is like throwing some
throwing some toy counter examples at it
and seeing if you agree or disagree or
not and that whole thing is like way
easier if you're doing it for a short
simple
argument um so that's the
intelligibility that's why I think
intelligibility comes from modular style
and philosophy extensibility so suppose
you change your mind every five minutes
or in Russell's case every in the middle
of a sentence three times
um you and you acquire new beliefs and
now you want to argue for those two if
your argument is a Big Blob like your
whole end conclusion is under threat
just from the fact potentially just from
the fact that you acquired some new
beliefs um and now you got to get in
there and now you got to maybe revise
your entire argument that's like I don't
know how long it is it's like really
long to accommodate your new
beliefs however if you factor off
different parts of your argument into
sub arguments
which can be carried out independently
of the whole and Each of which has a
specific job um it usually turns out
that um new beliefs you came to are only
going to put some of those sub arguments
under threat and it's going to take less
work to fix those or update those than
it would have to update the whole
blob
um so similarly uh fixing problems it's
pretty much the same argument as for
sensibility um um you know if you're
attending a talk at a conference um and
uh somebody uh presents you with a
modular argument um as the conference
attendee um it's much easier for you to
be like okay I agree with this this and
this but then here is where I get off
the train and this is why here's my
counter example whereas with a blob it's
like I don't know I don't buy this but I
don't see exactly where or why I don't
buy
it um reusability this comes in in
philosophy as well um um because uh
often it turns out that um a Lemma you
factored off of your main argument is
useful in more than one place you might
want to invoke it for three or four
different arguments without having to
necessarily inline it uh to use the
computer science term or repeat it in
those other places um and in the case of
minimum wage um it's true that like um
David Newark and uh Michael boser have
um they do have a dog in the minimum
wage policy fight um now just to be
clear I don't have a dog in the minimum
wage policy fight I I the only the only
thing I think is you know uh if if
somebody isn't getting paid enough money
and we should do whatever we we got to
do to get them paid more money so I have
the extremely I have that extremely
Bland and interesting dog in that fight
but I'm personally I'm much more
interested in the empirical stuff um
which is why the way they approach that
book speaks to me um and this is this
reason for this is simple it's because
the um empirical argument um factoring
the empirical argument off from the
policy argument as they're careful to do
in that book decouples the purpose of
one from the other um there's tons of
reasons you can be interested in what
the effects of a minimum wage increase
would be other than
like because you're in the situation of
like deciding whether or not to do
it so uh philosophical arguments and uh
code uh both should be modular they both
get the same benefits of being modular
why is this well in my opinion this is
because of the curry Howard is morphism
one of the great lessons of the curry
Howard isomorphism is that philosophical
arguments literally are pseudo code um
so we can talk about that more during
the Q&A maybe not everybody agrees with
that but um I think that I I take that
to be one of the lessons the curry
Howard isomorphism so under the curry
Howard morphism intuitionist the
conditional L reduction corresponds to
lamb abstraction and function
application corresponds to modus ponents
so that means that if I was to you know
for example try to Cod up the new Mark
washer refactor in agda setting up some
inference rules and setting up some um
Atomic propositions if we we you know uh
if we uh we could we we could render the
Big Blob argument this way and then in
that case fating off the empirical part
they're interested in literally is just
writing a helper function so um one of
the great things about agda one of the
things I love about agda is that it just
like plainly exhibits the curry Howard
isomorphism so um here we have just the
um the argument that they want to focus
on for most of the book before they make
some tentative conclusion to the
conclusion uh we have that and that
literally just is a helper function so
um anyway this is why it's like I think
it's no accident that modular philosophy
is good in the same way that modular
code is good so um uh take away from
that I think philosophy could use in
Uncle Bob Martin if anyone at this
conference wants to step up and
volunteer to be philosophy's next Uncle
Bob Martin please get in touch because I
think it would be
great so what about problems for modular
code well um so modular code has its
attractors and you will see people get
into flame Wars about this on the
internet and at work too they get into
flame Wars in person at work so what's
the problem with Mod code well um
there's lots of things that people talk
about but there's one objection that I
think is really deep and I think it's a
very powerful objection so I want to
focus on that
um to get there let's go back to the
original example I'm going to do the
thing where I had the the helper
functions in global scope um uh to make
various things easier so this is a
version where we had the helper
functions to Global scope rather than
local um let's just keep going let's
refactor off a bunch more stuff so we
started refactoring the is uppercase
checking Logic the is a lowercase
character checking logic Factor those
off let's keep going so I'm gon to split
the code up into two little panes here
otherwise I didn't change anything all
right now first refactor is going to be
like well how about we Factor off the
rotating so let's write a general
purpose rotating function that can take
any character and rotate it not just by
13 but by however much you want to
rotate it by and this Rod function will
be able to do any Caesar cyer uh yeah
any Caesar Cipher not just Rod 13 so
that's great it's a general purpose
function and it also cleans up the code
on the right you can see the code on the
right got
shorter next we can Factor off the
character range checking from iser is
uppercase and is lowercase I think that
definitely makes is uppercase and is
lower case a lot easier to read you just
checking to see whether something's um
in uh you know within uh 26 characters
of the start
character you can then continue
refactoring and I would encourage this
you can refact refactor the um integer
range checking off of the character
range checking um and just check whether
you know a number is between other two
other numbers very useful
function uh then finally um you if you
look at the code left here it's still
got a lot of numbers in it and human
eyeballs they don't like numbers human
eyeballs look at this they're like
what's 26 I don't remember what's 65 I
also don't remember what's 97 I also
don't remember now if you like mess
around with aski codes enough you will
remember but arguably that's um that's
um maybe that's not a skill you want to
have I don't know that's debatable uh so
what should we do probably we should
give these numbers names so we can
remember what they are so we'll call one
ask a we'll call one asky capital A
we'll call one the length of the
alphabet and now I think this whole
thing gets a bit more
readable the last thing we're going to
factor off is uh so you see on the right
there um this is the uh there's a little
fun arrow thing on the right there
that's the that's the function that's
going to look at every single character
in the string decide whether or not to
rotate it let's just pull that out make
that a separate function too and then
the final final thing we're going to do
which I always tell is kind of thing I
want tell my students to do is like
these n and conditionals in my opinion
are pretty nasty so let's just change
into match expression all right so now
okay so now now we turned the nasty Rod
13 code that I started with off into
some we turned that into something that
would now pass code review uh at least
in my shop great so we've refactored it
it's beautiful uh oh now we got now we
can see the problem what's the
problem so the good thing was we have
this between thing you got to check
whether something is between two other
numbers all the time that can get
promoted into our general purpose
library checking the uppercase lower
case that can get promoted to general
purpose Library general purpose Caesar
Cipher that can get promoted into our
upper into our general purpose Library
it's not just for R
13 but the problem is that if we
actually once we actually start reusing
these fellas over here
they can't live here they can't live in
this file anymore we're gonna have to
they're GNA have to Vose off into
different projects on my on my hard
drive different subdirectories in here
maybe even different computers different
systems different file systems different
operating systems different like across
the world over the Internet they're not
going to live right here in this file
anymore but right here in this file is
where they were really contributing to
the readability of the
code they're not going to have to be
they're not gonna be here in one place
and I mean look we could leave them here
but if we left them here it would be
nonsense because now like all this other
code I'm writing has nothing to do with
r 13 is going to be calling into my rot
13 code to check whether one number is
between another number is in between two
other numbers just that that makes no
sense so this is the thing that people
complain about with modularity what you
often get when is a file containing this
one line in it and then it's like the
line is super cryptic and it's like in
order to understand what's going on
you're just gonna have to chase down the
references like each each car is
uppercase and ranged you have to go
hunting in your computer like where
where is that def find what file try to
open that file up blah blah blah blah
blah you're gonna go on this like you
know this long hunt and and that that
takes the amount of you know it takes uh
uh um enough work that you get
distracted from like thinking about what
the code is actually
doing um so basically chasing all these
references eats up your cognitive load
which you should be spending on
understanding the code so this is like
the number one complaint on modularity I
think it's a deep
complaint um the conclusion I want to
draw here is that there's a tradeoff
that's what it seems to me so modular
code brings these the these advantages
you have more intelligible code EXT more
extensible code more fixable code more
reusable code but the minute you take
that potential reusability and start
actually reusing stuff you tank the
other three virtues you tank the other
three benefits you compromise them so I
really think this is trade-off what do
we do not totally obvious
um um I think uh writing in what I
sometimes very metaphorically nickname
paramal style is the best optimum among
the options we discussed
so basically what you would do is you
would you would leave things like this
but don't actually reuse any of the
reusable stuff um and if you can have
this like nice little code pyramid it
optimizes for all four and then it stops
shot it stops short of actually reusing
the reusable stuff um and the intuition
behind this pyramid metaphor is that you
start off at a low level then you
construct with very little code a a
slightly higher level interface in a
small step and then you construct again
with very little code a slightly higher
level interface etc etc until you can
implement the actual thing you want out
of the interfaces you built up
progressively step by step um and each
stage of the pyramid should build the
next level up interface only out of what
exactly what is needed from the current
interface that's the intuition here so
you know something like this as I said
just vaguely roughly paramal that's the
that's the metaphor it's not uh intended
to be mathematically precise in any way
in this picture you can interpret XR y
as y uses X in its definition so this is
a code dependency um graph part ordering
but this is the like lowlevel en
manipulation interface this is a little
bit higher up character manipulation
interface this is the um check what the
properties of characters are interface
this is the transform a character
interface and this is a transform a
whole string
interface so the nice thing about
paramal style I argue um or what I'm
nicknaming paramal style is that it
scales because I could grow this code
into something that takes up like five
pages but it it wouldn't be five pages
more difficult to read it would just be
a bit more difficult to read because you
could jump in wherever you're interested
and start reading the code there if I'm
only interested in like I'm not
interested in how the uppercase lower
case sub is implemented I start reading
here if I am interested in how the
uppercase lowercase stuff is implemented
I start reading here etc etc and so this
paramal style building things up in
higher higher level interfaces allows
you to partition the process of reading
through the code into reasonable
chunks so um I don't know if any perfect
solution to this problem in the code
space the best solution I can think of
is to get your IDE to generator
parameter representation for you by
pulling in the code from where it
actually lives and making it looks like
it's in one place um so it would
effectively generate the representation
I had of R 13 just just a few slides ago
um actually doing that is a very
non-trivial coding problem um and um you
know to actually implement it um the
best language servers out there now I'm
thinking particularly of oamp Merlin are
like pretty have pretty deep
understanding of the ests they're
interacting with so it's not Unthinkable
that we could do this with little elbow
grease but it's certainly going to be
very hard so what about philosophy I
think philosophy has the same
trade-off the moment you start factoring
stuff off you you're gonna it's not
going to be in the in the original book
anymore it's gonna you're gonna file it
off in another book somewhere you're
gonna file off another article somewhere
and pretty soon a new reader coming to
this philosophy out of nowhere is gonna
be looking at one book at random and
they're gonna be like I have no idea
what's going on here without chasing
down 50 other books and then those books
are gonna give you more books to chase
down and what's even happening can't I
just look at the whole thing in one
place um so there's no IDs and
philosophy that can fix thisuh I mean no
IDs and philosophy at all unfortunately
maybe there will be someday um but I
mean I think you can sort of approximate
the solution I proposed for software by
um um just putting a lot of hard work
into the intro conclusion
contextualizing giving a sketch of some
of what this argument can be used for
and is used for so um yeah intro
conclusion um so uh run a along a time
here so I'm going to zip to the end um
I'm working on a formal definition of
modularity which is what I think we're
eventually going to need to advance
these debates uh it's it's really hard
and uh mathematically Savvy friends of
mine are help new with it uh probably
going to have to involve some free
algebra and Universal properties and
stuff uh High versus low level you can
probably capture which is an algebraic
homomorphism anyway not clear how to do
that but I'm working on it um so with
that let me wrap up um so I've argued
the modular code is code that's arranged
into this paramal shape uh which starts
at a low level and builds up in a series
of progressively higher and higher level
interfaces it's more intelligible
extensible fixable reusable this is why
people like it but actual reuse you
can't actually reuse the reusable part
if you actually reuse the reusable part
you screw over the rest of the virtues
modu philosophy exactly the same it is
the same because the curry Howard
isomorphism as the curry Howard
isomorphism shows us philosophical
arguments in pseudo code um but modular
philosophy has the same problem it's the
same problem that once you start
actually reusing the reusable stuff in
it you mess with the other good making
features of modular
philosophy so the ultimate solution um
I'm not sure what it is but it's
probably going to have to involve uh
some creativity in the like uiux for
readers area and I think I'll leave it
there thank you everybody you can check
out my website and podcast at URL and
these are the references to the books I
talked about and
papers thanks Matt uh next up we have um
R sanelli who is a teaching fellow at
the University of Chicago in the
humanities where he received his
PhD and um I have some other notes uh
his primary work is in philosophy of
language and philosophical logic and is
particularly concerned with the
relationship between the ability to
speak a language and the ability to
conceptually grasp what things in the
world are and how they might
be Ryan you can go ahead share screen if
you can or okay let me
see uh where is my share screen
should
[Music]
be uh why can't I
find Windows here it
is uh one sec here it
is all right can you all see
that yes
cool uh let me full screen
this screen
cool uh all right
um well yeah thanks uh Eric and Connor
for for organizing this really cool uh
event um I'm going to be talking about
inferentialism which is you know the
main sort of philosophical theory that
I've devoted a lot of time to working on
um and some sort of speculative
relations that it might have with
artificial intelligence and um Chris is
also going to be talking about
inferentialism later today so we'll get
a little more inferentialism
um okay so what is inferentialism um
let's see
uh yeah whatever um so here's here's a
question um what is required for concept
possession the inferentialist answer is
that grasp of a concept is Mastery of
the inferential role of a linguistic
expression that itself doesn't say
exactly what inferentialism is because
there's various different strengths at
which one could endorse The View that
Mastery of inferential role is required
for concept possession so there's uh a
range of possible ways to take this
answer the the weakest version is that
well at least some Concepts you need to
know some inferences it's not a very
interesting view almost everyone would
accept that um another relatively weak
answer is that well all Concepts require
knowing some inferences um once again
not very interesting I think a lot of
people would just accept this um where
it gets interesting is when you start
saying that mastering an inferential
role is sufficient for grasping a
concept and so this comes in two
versions um you could say well there's
some Concepts such that mastering the
influential Ro is sufficient for
grasping them or the most interesting
and strongest claim is what I'll call
Global strong inferentialism which is
the view that mastering an inferential
role is sufficient for the possession of
of all Concepts and that's the sort of
interesting and sort of ambitious
version of inferentialism I want talk
about here um so here's an argument um
that might be a little bit provocative
regarding uh strong inferentialism what
Global strong inferentialism so once
again this is the view that Mastery of
inferential role is sufficient for the
possession of all
Concepts so here's a plausible claim um
training on linguistic data um is in
principle sufficient for Mastery of
influential
role uh a consequence of global strong
inferentialism and this plausible claim
is that training in linguistic data is
impr principle sufficient for possession
of all
Concepts consequence of this is that
large language models um trained on
nothing but linguistic data are impr
principle capable of possessing all
Concepts and I'm want to keep using
these impr principle clauses because I
don't want to suggest that you know for
instance today's large language models
do in fact but the idea is in principle
large language models could possess all
Concepts given this line of argument so
my aim in the talk is somewhere between
the following two extremes uh minimally
I want to convince you that the validity
of this argument is not a reductio of
global strong influential ISM right the
conclusion might seem so implausible
that you might just think well this
means that Global strong inferentialism
is B
um so my minimal goal is to convince you
that that's not the case it's not just a
reductio of global strong inferentialism
maximally and I don't think I'll succeed
in doing this but the the maximal aim uh
is to convince you that this argument is
actually
sound okay um so let me start by just
saying some things about the the sort of
weaker version restricted strong
inferentialism because this is the
version of inferentialism that's gotten
a lot of traction in uh philosophy of
logic in particular so the most most
popular version of restricted strong
inferentialism is what's called logical
inferentialism um and this is the idea
that the meanings of The Logical
connectives can be understood in terms
of the inferential rules governing the
use so connectives like and not or um
they can be understood in terms of their
inferential roles and these can be
canonically specified by a certain kind
of formal proof
system um so standard simple example the
easiest case right take and maybe the
most uncontroversial connected when it
comes to actually formulating the rules
you might think that the meaning of and
is given by these rules in a natural
deduction system right so from a along
with B you can infer A and B right
that's the introduction rule which tells
you how to conclude A and B and then it
has a corresponding elimination rules
that let you conclude Things From A and
B right so one elimination Ru is from A
and B You can conclude a and the other
is from a and B You can conclude B and
these have nice properties they fit
together nicely in a way that's spoken
of as as Harmony um you might also use
different type of proof system to
capture the same basic inferential
behavior of and um so you might
formulate things in terms of a sequent
calculus um so here rather than
introduction and elimination rules you
have left rules and right rules so the
left rules codify the inferential role
of something as a premise right so this
says from some set of premises gamma and
a along with B if you can conclude C
then from gamma and a and b You can
conclude C and the right rule says if
from gamma You can conclude a and from
gamma You can conclude B then from gamma
You can conclude A and B right just
different ways of formally codifying the
inferential rules governing the use of
and but the basic thought of logical
inferentialism is that specification of
these rules and Mastery of these rules
right um is sufficient for grasp of the
concept of conjunction um and this is
still controversial and logic but lots
of people think that this is a very
plausible way of thinking about the
meanings of The Logical
connectives the stronger um and you know
more ambitious view um is what I'm
calling global inferentialism global
strong inferentialism um and that's the
view that it's not just logical words
like and or or not but also what called
in linguistic content words like red
sphere dog um these sort of
words with material content those two
can be understood in terms of the
inferential rules governing their use um
so just to give a simple example um
consider the meaning of red right this
might be understood in terms of the fact
that it's use is governed by inferential
rules such as the following right and
I'll use this the sort of sequent
calculus formulation to specify these um
from uh a is red you can confer infer a
is colored right right and from a is
Scarlet you can infer a is red um and
here's another kind of rule you might
have in a sort of sequence system right
uh this says uh from a is red and a is
green You can conclude an incoherence
right so this sort of encodes the fact
that these two sentences are incoherent
they're they're
incompatible um and likewise you know
you don't need just one thing right you
might have from a is red and B is pink
You can conclude a is darker than b
and you know you can spell out more of
these but it seems at some point you
sort of run up on the limits of what you
can includ encode as far as the meaning
of red goes in terms of inferential
rules um it seems like inferential rules
of this sort might be necessary aspects
of the meaning of red but you might be
inclined to think well these can't
exhaust the meaning of red uh and what
in particular is the issue here well
here's an issue it might seem right one
essential aspect of the meaning of red
um is that it can be properly deployed
non-inferentially right upon seeing
something that it's red right so not
only are there inferences right from
such and such as Scarlet to such and
such as red but from seeing something
red I can conclude that it's red so the
standard response to this issue is to
distinguish between two sorts of
inferential rules um so we have properly
inferential rules of the sort I just
specified um which obtain between uses
of language like asator utterances of
sentences uh and other uses of language
but in addition to these we have what we
might call quasi inferential rules which
obtain between uses of language and
non-linguistic perceptual circumstances
or intentional
actions um and well what is a quasi
inferential rule well it's kind of hard
to write down you can't really give a
formula for it but you know intuitively
there's something like well from seeing
the red ball I can conclude that the
ball is red right and I Ed the little V
Dash sign but it's not really an
inference in the proper sense of the
term because one of the relat isn't a
sentence or a use of a sentence it's a
perceptual
circumstance and the vast majority of
proponents of inferentialism think that
in addition to properly inferential
rules you have to include these weird
sort of Quasi inferential rules that
relate non-linguistic circum ances to
linguistic
things I think this essentially amounts
to giving up the game um I think
emitting such quasi inferential rules
into an inferentialist picture um is T
out to abandoning strong inferentialism
right so we I distinguish between strong
and weak inferentialism and I'm trying
to sort of spell out this the strong
inferentialist view I think this is sort
of strong infer it's weak inferentialism
in strong
inferentialist uh guys as it were this
isn't really an inferential Rule and so
this isn't really a strong
inferentialist picture and if you think
there's sort of motivations for
inferentialism as a sort of full-blooded
theory of conceptual content something
that actually explains the concepts
expressed by uses of language I think
there's reason to want to hold on to the
genuine strong inferentialist picture
and so reject this sort of standard
response so I think we should stay
strong uh try to maintain a strong
inferentialist conception of conceptual
content in light of this apparent issue
um but how do we do that um I take it we
just need more inferential relations the
standard strong inferentialist view just
doesn't include the necessary
inferential relations needed to actually
account for the conceptual content of an
expression like red so what sort of
inferences do we actually need well the
ones I just mentioned
are what we might speak of as
intrafamilial inferences right they're
inferences within the range of color
concepts right they relate one color
concept to other color concepts but I
take it that such intrafamilial
inferential relations aren't going to be
sufficient to capture the meaning of red
I mean in some sense this is what I've
just stated so rather than including
quasi inferential relations let's just
conclude more inferential relations so
we include extra familial inferences so
these are such things as if a is a stop
sign well then a is red right from a is
a stop sign You can conclude a is red
and for instance from uh a is a
Blackberry a is ripe and a is red You
can conclude an incoherence right but
these themselves still don't resolve the
problem uh about the fact that red can
be deployed non inferentially so how
does one capture that in inferential
terms well relatively
easy um if a is red and some subject s
has color vision and S is looking at a
well then s sees that a is red right
this is just sort of a sort of sketchy
example of the sort of inferential
relation that I take to inferentially
articulate this aspect of the content of
red right so an aspect of the content of
red is that it can be deployed
non-inferentially how do we articulate
that well in terms of this inferential
relation that involves the inference to
the fact that someone sees that a is red
so I take it that these inferences right
suffice to completely articulate the
conceptual content of red uh no quasi
infuential no quasi inferences are
needed um this is this is a view that
I've defended uh at length in a paper
called how to be a hyper inferentialist
um so if you want the full story of how
this can actually be sort of spelled out
and responses to philosophical
objections uh you can you can look at
that paper um but I'm going to sort of
take this as a starting point for for
thinking about these issues about uh
inferentialism in AI so so let me just
start by drawing out some some
consequences of this View and let me
start with a a famous thought experiment
owed to Frank Jackson um so this is
called Mary's room right so so Mary is a
color scientist uh she's been locked in
a black and white room since birth and
so she's never experienced color right
but she has all the access to all the
books and you know internet and
everything Ray and she can do
experiments and she she has reached the
theoretical limit of what can be known
about colors without ever having to
actually experienced them so a question
one might ask about Mary right
concerning her possession of the concept
red or not right does she know what it
is to be for something to be
read the standard intuition that people
seem to have in response to this thought
experiment is no right she doesn't
really know what it is for something to
be read she has this sort of theoretical
understanding but to really know what it
is for something to be read you have to
actually see red right only by seeing
red can you really know what it is for
something to be read I want to say this
is this is wrong uh yes she knows just
what it is for something to be read
since she grasps all the inferential
relations between sentences that
articulate the content of
red um so of course she never herself
has never use the term
non-inferentially um that's you know
stipulation of the thought experiment um
um nevertheless she knows just the
conditions under which it can be
non-inferentially used um and that
captures the fact that this expression
is essentially such that it can be used
non differentially and according to this
view that's all that's required in order
to be counted as knowing the meaning of
red um and we can actually you know take
this one step further applying the same
basic thought um not only does she know
what it is for something to be read in
fact she knows what it is for something
to ah sorry she knows what it is to see
that something's red um why well because
you can articulate the content of C is
that a is red right um the inferential
relations articulate this conceptual
content just as well as they articulate
the conceptual content of red and you
know I mean I I acknowledge this is a
counterintuitive view a lots of people
you know maintain the standard no she
can't know what it is to see that
something's red but I just don't see
what the non-question begging argument
uh against this dispute that Advanced
here is Right other than just table
pounding um so I take it she fully knows
what it is to see something red she
hasn't seen something red but she knows
what it is to see something red so she
possesses this concept so so this is one
case I take it in which one can have an
experiential concept right knowing what
it is to see something Red without
having that particular experience so one
natural thought one might ask is can
this thought be generalized right might
this thought be applied globally to
something without any experiences at all
so in order to spill this out um let me
make a distinction between uh sentience
and sapience so sentience is conscious
Awareness sapience on the other hand is
conceptual understanding and I'll say a
bit more about exactly what I mean by
these two terms in a minute but just
sort of intuitively we can start sort of
sorting some clear cases into these
various categories so something are
neither sentient nor Sapient this
includes such things as rocks trees you
know maybe some people have suggested
that trees are Sapient but sentient
sorry but I take it they they're not uh
thermometers are clearly not sentient
they respond to their environment in a
certain way but they're not that sort of
responsiveness doesn't constitute
sentients there's some things that are
sentient but not Sapient this includes
such things as lions ferrets octopi I
take it
then there are things that are both
sentient and Sapient I take it that
we're in this category right not only
are we consciously aware of our
environment but we have a conceptual
understanding of it this includes you
know sort of standard intelligent aliens
that you see in science fiction
scenarios like clons um and it also
includes certain uh canonical sort of
sci-fi characterizations of artificial
intelligence for instance you know in
Spielberg's artificial intelligence uh
were at least led to imagine these
artificial intelligence systems are both
sentient and
Sapient um but this sort of what about
this other category of not sentient but
Sapient can anything fill that category
um I want to suggest that perhaps uh
llms could in principle occupy this
category um so so before I spell that
out let me just say a few more things
for fleshing out this idea of sentients
versus sapience um um I'll adopt a sort
of call broadly hiigaran picture of
sentience so what is it to possess
conscious
awareness uh here's this sort of broadly
speaking hiigaran answer um it's to have
a world in which things show up as
significant in various ways uh as to be
responded to in various ways given one's
ends uh so here's a you know
oversimplified example uh you know to
the lion the gazelle shows up as to be
eaten right uh the Cub shows up as to be
nurtured right so the lion sort of
occupies this melt this world of
philosophical signific not philosophical
sorry world of practical significances
in which things show up as to be
responded to in various ways um and I
take it you know this is the right way
to understand perception is as one sort
of aspect of a perception access NE
perception action Nexus through which
you have something that goes about the
world achieving its ends things in the
world show up is to be acted upon and it
acts upon them achieving its ends and so
perception is sort of one aspect of it's
the receptive aspect of this perception
action Nexus and the important point
just I want to stress here right I won't
go into the details about this sort of
philosophy of perception but the
important point is that if you think
about perception and conscious awareness
in this way it essentially involves as
John hogland puts it giving a damn um
being something that in some way cares
about achieving its ends only in such a
context can things show up as
significant to such a thing so can of
have a world of
significances okay so that's that's what
I take sentience to be once again I
can't sort of spell this out in detail
but this is just a gesture at the sort
of approach to sentience I'd be inclined
towards what about sapience well here's
what brandom says uh characterizing us
as Sapient uh this is Robert brandom one
of the notable developers of
inferentialism he says our transactions
with other things and with each other in
a special and characteristic sense means
something to us they have a conceptual
content we understand them in one way
rather than another and the idea is we
have a sort of a determinant grip on the
various things that show up to us we can
think about them uh in effect we we have
a grasp on the world as it shows up to
us so what is it to possess this sort of
conceptual understanding well they take
it that this sort of conceptual
understanding is essentially tied with
the ability to speak and understand a
language and I've already sort of given
the answer that I take this conceptual
understanding to consist in it's Mastery
of inferential role right and once again
uh the global strong inferentialist
answer says that Mastery of inferential
Ro is sufficient for possession of all
Concepts so for us right beings who are
sapen right we're human beings we're
animals so sorry beings who are sentient
right we're human beings we're animals
so we're sentient we have a world in
which things show up to us as
practically significant on which we act
for us conceptual understanding
transforms what it is for us to be
consciously aware of the world here I'm
drawing on work of of Matt Bole and some
other people so our form of sentience is
a distinctively Sapient sentience we
might
say but we might wonder right could
there be a form of sapience without
sentience right that's not our form of
sapience but could there be such a
notion and here I want to consider the
case of large language models um and
just sort of for the simple purposes of
this talk I'm going to focus on what
I'll call Pure
llms um so a lot of today's uh AI models
are now are what's called multimodal
models that also include sort of video
input and other things like this um but
the original version for instance of GPT
4 was was a pure llm where it just was
trained on linguistic data and this is
the sort of uh theoretically simple case
I want to sort of focus on just to sort
of concern myself with this
philosophical point right so these AI
models uh they're neural networks that
are that are trained on massive amounts
of linguistic data basically they're fed
the whole internet give or take some um
and they're trained to predict the next
word in a sequence given the previous
words right and there's this sort of
algorithm through which they can acquire
this capacity to P the next word to
predict the next word uh through a lot
of training then they're sort of fine
tuned they TR on sort of
specific data um for instance question
and answer texts so that they do the
right thing that you want them to do
when you uh prompt them so for instance
rather than just sort of continuing as
if they were you they actually answer
your question um and so when you
actually use one of these things the way
it works and once again I'm just sort of
really oversimplifying here but just to
give you the general sort of picture um
you ask it a question right and it just
predicts the next word right it it it
that that's what it's trained to do
um so it starts predicting the next word
and then it feeds that back into the
inference engine and predicts the next
word in that sequence and so on
recursively and then through that it
ends up sort of spitting out um fluent
English sentences that actually sort of
answer your question um you know I'm not
going to go into details here but the
crucial point I want to emphasize is
just sort of given this architecture
right they don't care they don't give a
damn um these aren't the sort of things
that uh have you know a world of
significances um they they're not the
sort of things that give a damn and John
Hogan sort of took this to be a sort of
basic problem with AI um he says the the
trouble with artificial intelligence is
that computers don't give a damn and I
want to suggest that he's right that at
least sort of current large language
models don't give a damn they're not the
sorts of things that could but he's
wrong to think that this is a sort of
in-principle problem for them when it
comes to sort of understanding things um
so consider just the case of of reading
um I take it the current llms are are
are still Limited in a whole bunch of
ways um but I do take it that they can
read um so by that I mean they can take
a text they can summarize it and they
can understand its
meaning um Can GP gp4 provide profound
literary analysis no of course not uh
but it can score better than 93% of
school students on the reading portion
of the SAT uh will GPT 6 uh once again
assuming it's just a pure llm which it
probably won't be but if it is you know
a few Generations down the road will it
be able to do serious literary analysis
uh I want to suggest maybe um so so
hogland against computers reading says
only a being that cares about who it is
as some sort of enduring whole can care
about guilt or folly self-respect or
achievement life or death and he says
only such a being can read
um I take it that he just is making an
error here um if the sort of
inferentialist view that I've sketched
before is Right understanding the
meaning of a fable or a DKI novel
doesn't require giving a damn oneself it
just requires knowing what it is to give
a dam and so I want to suggest you know
like the Mary case right just like Mary
can understand what it is to see Red
without herself ever seeing red an llm
can in principle know what it is to give
a damn without itself giving a
damn so you know in response to this we
might still have this sort of lingering
intuition to to insist right well it
doesn't really understand right I mean
given the way I just describe this thing
right it can't really understand can it
um I want to ask you know what are we
really asking when we when we ask this
question um and here I want to draw on a
sort of famous quote from Wilfred sers
he says in characterizing an episode or
state as that of knowing we're not
giving an empirical description of this
episode or state we're placing it in the
space of reasons of justifying and being
able to justify what one says so here's
a spin on this basic solarian thought in
characterizing a system be it a human
being an EXT extraterrestrial or a
computer program as reasoning or
understanding we're not giving an
empirical description of that individual
we're placing them in the logical space
of reasons of justifying and being able
to justify what one says so if we stick
with this solarian
thought um one way to
AB so the space of justifying and being
able to justify what it says and I take
it once again the answer here is at
least in principle yes right there's
nothing about llms that suggests that in
principle they couldn't be in such a
space now I take a contemporary systems
when you really press them on it
sometimes you get the sense of well no
they they don't really understand what
they're saying they're not actually
responding in an intelligible way um but
there's nothing about the very idea of
an llm that would suggest that in
principle this is impossible
so why does this matter um well here's
what I take it we want at least this is
the sort of thing that I want in AI
systems I mean there's other
applications for instance you know AI
Butlers and whatnot that different but
in s language models right what we want
is AI systems that truly understand what
we're saying to them and what they're
saying back to us I mean if you just
think about it right as number of
researchers in this uh conference right
how nice would it be to have such a
system as a research SE system that
would be amazing uh what don't we want
um well we don't want AI systems that
kill us all uh that would be that would
be very bad um so the first thing what
we want is sapience uh however with
sentience right with giving a damn uh
with being a thing that actually cares
about uh what it is as a continued thing
the risk of the second thing goes
exponentially up so perhaps it may be
the case that practically speaking the
easiest way to True set sapience is
through
sentience uh I don't know if this is the
case I'm not an AI researcher um but
also I don't think AI researchers
currently know either um but I take it
that as we do the risk reward
calculations uh as we develop more and
more capable systems uh an important
consideration is whether there is at
least the theoretical possibility of
sapients without sentients and I hope
you I I hope that I've done enough here
to convince you that at least the very
idea of theoretical possibilities not
crazy uh all right thanks um the slides
are available on my website if you want
to take a look at that uh here are the
references uh thanks everyone
uh one second
please
e e
uh give us one
second
e
e e
hello e
hello uh thank you for coming here uh
next we have uh Alysa vanenburg uh PhD
who is a uh licensed clinical
psychologist uh and also an assistant
professor at uh Northwestern
University uh she uh is uh was currently
was in the uh uh Rehabilitation
department is currently uh moving to the
neurology department and today she's
going to speak about the ethics of
telepsychology all right thanks Eric can
everyone hear
me okay all right
so all right so just to introduce myself
um like Eric said um I'm an assistant
professor at Northwestern University
fineberg School of Medicine and I've
been in the physical medicine and
rehabilitation Department I earned my
PhD in Clinical Psychology from Duke
University um I did my clinical
internship residency at um Yale School
of Medicine and Behavioral
Medicine so my areas um really are
Health psychology and Behavioral
Medicine kind of medical psychology um
and I did my post-doctoral fellowship at
Northwestern vineberg School of Medicine
um and I'm talking about ethics of
telepsychology ology today um I actually
got interested in the ethics of teles
psychology in 2016 before I had ever
actually done any teles psychology um I
didn't get any exposure to it until
right before the pandemic when I was at
Yale and was working in smoking
sensation um so um yeah that's kind of
when my interest started and now um
about half of my practice is um Talis
psychology I'm currently um practicing
as a sleep psychologist at Northwestern
um in 2 pm which we're currently at on
Eastern time is known as the Circadian
dead zone so this is when your body
clocks in its deepest dip so um to try
to get everybody
um uh feeling more energized I'm going
to start with a question um how many of
you both in person and on Zoom have
experienced with Tal
psychology all right we've got some all
right okay um so I like to do some
disclosures and disclaimers um I don't
have any conflicts of interest to report
I don't receive any industry sponsorship
um this is really for educational
purposes today only it's not a
substitute for professional consultation
or for Consulting current laws State
national regulatory rules um and the
views Express in this presentation are
my own and don't necessarily um reflect
those um of Northwestern but uh
hopefully there's
alignment all right so um you might be
wondering how I fit into this
conference um so the ethics of T
psychology represents an application of
the methodology of Science in ensuring
responsible and effective practice
crucial for maintaining the Integrity of
therapeutic relationships in a digital
environment um I'm going to be focusing
today on psychologist practice as I'm a
psychologist um and am in formed um by
the American Psychological association's
guidelines that were released for the
practice of tele psychology in
2013 um and while centered on
Psychotherapy this also applies to
testing and assessment um which there
has also been more of um
online um I'm going to be using the term
patience um to individuals receiving
care rather than clients U this is just
a personal preference also um one that's
often common in the hospital system but
I just you know I find clients as more
of like a transactional business-like
relationship um and um you know patients
can emphasize the clinical and
therapeutic nature of
care um and again while I'm talking kind
of about um teles psychology
specifically these principles um really
apply to Tele medicine more broadly okay
so teles psychology what is it um the
American Psychological Association in
2013 Divi um defined it as the provision
of Psychological Services via
telecommunication Technologies um
including phone video conferencing email
text um these can augment in-person
services or function
independently um with Communications
being synchronous or
asynchronous um and actually the origins
of teles pychology go back further than
you might
think um kind of the began in 1960 to
address the need for reaching hard to
access populations such as um doing
remote forensic
assessments um and yeah definitely um
been quite the evolution particularly
since the pandemic with h psychology
mental health and substance use out
patient visits made up only 9 11% of all
outpatient tele Health visits or out of
outpatient visits in 2019 and now it's
um just by 2020 is Rose to 40% um so
here's kind of a a graph of um its
rising and
evolution all right so to give you kind
of an overview of what I'm going to be
talking about um the key topics for the
tele psychology ethical considerations
um I'm going to be talking about access
um so thinking about technology economic
Geographic barriers and cultural and
disability
considerations um also informed consent
so informed consent being you know the
process by which a psychologist informs
patients about what to expect enabling
them to make an informed decision about
therapy about Tes
psychology um also ideas such as uh
privacy risk and secure
environments um addressing technological
risks um also uh I'll separately talk
about privacy location privacy for
psychologists and patients uh managing
technological security and then
competence so um you know does the
psychologist have the technical skills
and are they getting um ongoing training
to develop those skills and then what's
can be some of the cross state practic
challenges all right so first kind of
talking about um the the ethical issue
of access in teles
Psychology um you know things to think
about um are you know do patients have
access to the necessary devices internet
and the skills to effectively use um
teles psychology platforms um what does
this look like when um psychologists
only offer
um Tel Psychology Services um and maybe
you know gave up their in-person
office also thinking about are there
Financial obstacles such as the cost of
purchasing a compatible device or gaps
in insurance coverage for Tel Psychology
Services that limit patients access um
Medicare currently um you know is
covering um telepsychology especially
the um uh the first session but that
might change um that um that's kind of
through through the end of 2024 and then
they're going to re-evaluate which
they've been doing every year but you
know that might be something that goes
away at some
point um and then Geographic and
infrastructure disparities um how do
geographic location and infrastructure
issues like access to high-speed
internet um affects patients abilities
to utilize telep psychology you know
maybe they're able to
um sign on for a session but because of
their access um sessions get interrupted
calls get
dropped and then also thinking about
cultural and disability access are Tel
Psychology Services available to
patients with language cultural or
disability related challenges such as
those that might require translation
service or Adaptive
Technologies um that might hinder their
participation prior to being at
Northwestern I worked at um
uh Shirley Ryan which is a a
rehabilitation hospital in um Chicago
that's affiliated with
Northwestern and um worked with a lot of
patients who have traumatic brain
injuries spinal cord injuries um and um
history of stroke um so you know that um
that's something really to
consider so there've been kind of um as
as somebody who um has both done the uh
practice and research my um my
post-doctoral fellowship was actually a
research Fellowship um I do like to
highlight uh research so there have been
um some interesting studies about um
access and telepsychology since um the
pandemic so a study in 2020 by Smith um
at all examined the tele Health use
among cancer patients at a New York City
Cancer Center um and reveal significant
disparities with 50% of video visits
were white patients while only 17% were
black patients 8% Asian patients and 5%
latinx patients um so yeah just really
keeping in mind um you know who what are
some of the disparities here and then
another study in 2021 looked at tele
medicine adoption in Milwaukee during
the pandemic younger white patients with
private insurance favored video visits
while older black patients with public
insurance lean toward phone visits um
and latinxs and Asian populations were
less likely to use tele medicine overall
women used it more than men um and there
was a strong link between college
education and video visit adoption so
again thinking about those um you know
that there have been a lot of
psychologists who maybe have given up
their um office spaces in the pandemic
because people didn't want to come in or
because of the cost and you know what
happens when um there isn't as much
access to to patients who need
Services all right so now moving on to
informed consent um thinking about
patients location privacy are patients
aware of the Privacy risks in their
environment such as being overheard or
the potential for compromised safety and
domestic violence
situations um have the limits to
confidentiality been clearly
communicated by the psychologist to
patient stressing the importance of
conducting sessions in a quiet quiet
private space um if you've used
telepsychology maybe you've experience
this yourself having someone else in the
home and you know maybe not being able
to to open up as much as you would be in
an inperson
setting also thinking about the
psychologist location privacy um has the
psychologist environment been discussed
to ensure that it's secure and
private um is there a dedicated home
office that maintains confidentiality
how are records being stored you know if
if the the psychologist is working from
home um and what you know what steps are
they taking to minimize the risk of
electronic communications being
exposed um and then um lastly on this
slide um technological and environmental
security have both the patient and
psychologist address potential
technological risks such as unauthorized
access to sessions or stored information
are secure platforms and internet
connections being used are you using
public WiFi um or an unsecure connection
and are ethical implications of
accessing online patient information
really being
considered all
right um and then we've touched on some
of this already but thinking more about
privacy
um uh oh wait
there's a a
repeat
um all right let me
see okay so um yeah some of the the
Privacy um studies that I wanted to
highlight um is um a study from
2023 that um systematically reviewed 18
us-based empirical studies to identify
challenges and factors related to
privacy and teleah health during the
covid pandemic um and it found you know
three main risk factors environmental
like the lack of private spaces
challenges with sharing sensitive
information um techn technology related
issues like data security issues limited
internet access and operational issues
like reimbursement problems technology
accessibility training
needs um and another study in 2023
examined clinicians perspectives on tal
Health um following its its widespread
adoption um many providers Express
concerns that telal Health sessions are
less private than in-person care um and
reported that patients frequently lacked
private spaces for sessions leading to
instances where patients were reluctant
to discuss certain issues with for fear
of being overheard or even discuss um
sensitive Topics in front of family
members all right
and then lastly um I wanted to um touch
on um competence so um the idea that um
for technical competence first of all
you know does the psychologist have the
necessary technical knowledge um
including proficiency with video chat
platforms to deliver effective remote
Services um and psychologists are also
responsible for assessing and ensuring
the client's technical competence
um and then ongoing professional
development is a psychologist regularly
updating their Knowledge and Skills to
ensure that telecommunication
Technologies are suitable for delivering
the highest standard of care um this
includes staying current with advances
and technology and ethical
standards and then cross state practice
consideration and maybe some of you have
encountered this you know how does the
psychologist handle the complexities of
practicing across state lines um and
what steps are taken
um patient moves or travels out of state
um psychologists must navigate legal
requirements and en just jurisdictional
practice guidelines and there have been
a lot of changes to that since the
pandemic all right and so
um that's what I have um I was nervous
about with the the timing of these talks
and running over to the next person so I
finished a little early um but um some
of the references here are the first one
you know if you're curious learning more
about the American Psychological
association's guidelines for the
practice of
telepsychology um their main publication
was that 2013 one I also cite the um
other studies that I mentioned um that
have been done since the pandemic um and
if you have any questions I'm happy to
take those during the Q&A portion uh
what time is that
again four four so I'm happy to take
those then thank you so
much e
hello our next speaker is Corey thorough
who is a philosopher and U musician and
uh aspiring mathematician and computer
scientists uh based in uh Baltimore and
um they uh I'm really uh pleased to uh
present uh uh introduce uh Corey today
I've had a lot of conversations with him
and he definitely knows uh uh the most
of anyone I know about uh um uh
particularly CC HCK work and Henry fln's
work in relationship to uh intuitionism
so um uh Corey thanks
there oh the I don't think the uh slide
is
displaying for
all
right oh I need
that uh all right uh so uh I'm going to
be giving a presentation on the 20th
century mathematician poet and Soviet
dissident Alexander yenan vulpin uh so
vulpin is could be described as the
father of ultra intuitionism which I
will present a bit of today um I'm not
going to be arguing for or against one
or another um uh given positions in the
philosophy of mathematics so um I I
prefer to treat the civilizations
philosophical orientations uh somewhat
like the cultural Anthropologist treats
the cosmologies of the tribes they study
so I'm not trying to convince you or
dissuade you from becoming an ultra
intuitionist um that's not my problem uh
so there will be a combination of
biography history and theory and given
30 minutes all of it's going to be a
little bit hand wavy uh I was just gonna
speak on his uh yeah turn up the
volume uh which is the
um the first
one check check um is that better okay
uh okay so uh so this is all going to be
a little bit handwavy I was just going
to originally talk about his paper um
the ultra intuitionistic criticism and
the anti-traditional program for
foundations of mathematics uh but his uh
political life turned out to be just as
compelling to me as his mathematics and
I think they
both they sure they they each
contextualize each other nicely uh so my
hope would be that the breadth uh just
compels you to look deeper in your own
time uh so Alexander yenan vulpin uh he
was born born in 1924 in the Soviet
former Soviet Union he was the son of
the poet yenan uh probably Russia's most
prominent modern uh poet uh vulpin was a
notable dissident political prisoner
poet and mathematician logician he was a
the leader or a leader of the human
rights movement and he spent a total of
14 years uh incarcerated and repressed
by the Soviet authorities in prisons
pushka and Exile uh pushka were sort of
pseudo psychiatric hospitals that um
were used as prisons in order to isolate
prisoners and break them physically and
mentally and discredit their ideas and
if you look up um the Wikipedia page for
uh SE kushka vulpin is on there um so he
he spent a ton of his time incarcerated
and sort of politically tortured uh so
I'm going to start with his political
activity
um vulpin formulated the legalist
strategy of political dissidence which
what it came to be called um which went
on to predominate in the Russian Civil
Rights movement in the mid and late 20th
century uh so I'm going to give some
background on this now uh much of what
I'm about to read is either cited or
paraphrased from the American
mathematician critic and growth and
deque translator Roy lisker who wrote A
series on vulpin in his magazine ferment
and uh who called vulpin the Russian
Thomas Payne um in Spring of 1958 uh so
a statue of the P poet mayakovski was
unveiled in mayakovski square near the
center of ma Moscow and after Stalin's
regime uh there ended there was a period
where sort of instead of um instead of
being tried and told that you were going
to get 10 years in prison and then being
shot uh you actually would be tried and
get 10 years in prison um so the uh so
the political uh opposition uh felt had
had slightly more freedom
um so this this statue of mayakovski
opens up in mayakovski square and um uh
the spontaneous poetry readings start
popping up there uh with huge numbers of
people coming out five hundreds of
hundreds of people coming out and
reading poems from dissidents who had
been killed or uh exiled uh and also
poets from all around Russia um coming
and reading there uh and it become
became such a nuisance for the regime
that they
tried to quash it with the Army multiple
times over the course of two years and
um the people at these organizations
would often like form barricades around
the readers uh and um keep the the uh
the Army from breaking them apart and
eventually they did sort of break down
in
1960 um so at 19 in 1960 earlier than
that at makovski Square according to the
poet bukovski uh vulpin delivered his
first speech on the strategy of legality
or Le legalism as it came to be called
and um legalism says that the most
effective way to combat a lawless
government is one to uh obey it uh the
laws of the Constitution uh and also to
insist that um the government itself
obey the laws of the Constitution uh so
the laws of the Soviet Constitution were
filled with plenty of totally fine laws
uh and the problem but but but the
regime was sort of um not following any
of the the laws the ones that you would
want or the ones that you wouldn't so
the first step was to insist that the
government obey its own laws um so
here's the quote from Roy lisker about
1962 uh vulin soon provided a graphic
illustration of the kinds of effective
tactics possible through the use of his
strategy of legality the government uh
rounded up the persons they consider the
organizers of the makovski square
readings and used them to Stage the
first pro prominent show trial of the
1960s uh the trial of Alexander Ginsburg
Ilia boxstein Edward kitov and Vladimir
oov uh they were accused of having
conspired in an assassination plot uh
which was an invented fairy tale that
even the prosecutors didn't take
seriously the real reason uh was their
organization of the m kovski Square
readings as was customary in these
things the trial was removed to a venue
difficult of access to the general
public to whom it was in any case closed
vulpin breached the walls of the
courtroom for the first time in Soviet
history uh so and then to quote bukovski
again he showed up at the doors of the
courthouse brandishing a copy of the
criminal code guards naturally tried to
prevent him from entering but by a
persistent herang he was actually able
to convince them that it was against the
law to refuse him entry they might even
get into trouble by keeping him out if
he should choose to register a complaint
with the right people uh little did we
realize that this absurd incident with
the comical Alec vulpen brandishing the
criminal code like a magic wand to melt
the doors of the Court was the beginning
of our civil rights movement and the
movement for human rights in the USSR so
a lot of people disagree uh with
bukovski that that was the sort of
springboard moment for the civil rights
movement of the 20th C cury in the
Soviet Union um but the date that most
people agree was the springboard for the
civil rights movement in the Soviet
Union uh was also occurred and led and
organized by vulin um so which was
December 5th Constitution Day
1965 uh so vulpin organizes the first
opposition rally in Soviet Union uh in
four decades uh at Pushkin Square and um
comes with with a list of Demands um uh
the first demand is to respect your own
Constitution which is you know it's
Constitution Day so the authorities are
fine with that and the second is an open
trial for two dis two dissident writers
who had recently been arrested uh
notably they were arrested for the first
time uh in Soviet history uh for the
content of their writing so there was no
attempt to sort of make a fairy tale
about why they were being arrested uh um
so this is this moment is um
is um many claim that this day is is
sort of what what was the springboard
for much of the Soviets rights Soviet
Civil Rights Movement um so in 1968 just
moving along uh the government begins a
new wave of crackdowns on denters and
vulin is taken from his home uh by the
police under the pretense that he had
not reported to the psychiatric
outpatients department where he was
registered and to which he had not once
been summoned in the past four years um
so um Andre korov uh along with PS
alexandrov who I believe was also
mathematici uh initiated an appeal to
the USSR minister of Health which is uh
goes on to be signed by 99 additional
academics uh to improve his situation
and eventually vulpin is allowed to
immigrate to the United States and he's
the only dissident who allowed to IM
immigrate to the United States uh so he
was really annoying them
um um so now I'm going to speak a little
bit about some of the uh historical and
cultural context for Bin's mathematical
ideas
um so in order to speak about vulpin
Ultra intuitionism uh I need to give a
little bit of historical context by
talking about Ellie J Brower and his
formulation of intuitionism um so this
is an oversimplification but there are
often presented uh three modern
philosophies of mathematics which are
platonism formalism and intuitionism and
each one of these philosophies sort of
makes claims about where mathematics
exists uh so platonism claims that
mathematical entities
um are um exist in a a platonic sort of
Eternal Heaven uh
formalism um claims that uh mathematics
is um is a sort of uh a game of
conventions uh how you um for how you
manipulate uh um defined entities um and
the rules yeah the rules for their
manipulation
um um and intuitionism which was
formulated by Brower uh claims that
mathematical entities are uh mental
entities and that mathematics is um
concerned with the description of these
entities but that the language of
mathematics is sort of a derivative uh
phenomena so Ellie J brow was a famous
20th century Dutch mathematician he was
one of the most distinguished
topologists and math mathematicians of
the the 20th century he's primarily
known today for his fixed Point theorem
but he was um probably most preoccupied
with the problem of the composition of
the
Continuum for Brower um the linear
Continuum is to be built up from an
intuition uh which is abstracted from
the awareness of what he calls a move of
time uh in which he dubbed the tuity um
Tu so this intuition is a a diad
composed of uh the falling aart of the
given moment um into memory along with
the presence of the moment which
replaces it and awareness of this
intuition as the sort of primordial
intuition can be gained via
introspection according to Brower and um
uh Brower believed that the two was a a
way to found mathematics which um which
um sort of achieved an iru which sort of
achieved an irreducible status for both
continuity and uh discreetness so
discreetness and continuity are both
kind of ir irreducible in the um notion
of the uh
tuity um and he he was skeptical of the
idea that you could uh that you could
construct the Continuum um
uh on on discreet points alone uh
so for brow this intuition of time is
the sole a priori out of which all of
mathematics and Consciousness are built
so this is the thing that sort of
everything is structured out of um uh
the mathematician Spencer Gard um in an
essay that he wrote about one of vulpin
proteges kathern Chris henx says that it
should be stressed that brow's
alternative Continuum is a rigorous
mathematical Theory while philosophers
going back to Aristotle and earlier
speculated on the coherence of the
Continuum Brower proposed a precise
mathematical framework modeling one
possible viewpoint on these phenomena
out of all this effort came a
highly uh came a highly original
conception of the relationship between
the discret and the continuous a model
for the act of doing mathematics and a
mathematical theory of introspection in
total it was one of the most original
conceptual developments of the 20th
century and one that overlaps with other
fundamental artistic achievements in a
manner not yet fully appreciated and
just to clarify brower's intuitionism uh
differed in certain ways from the
formalization of it by his students most
notably uh hating um and I but I don't
really have time to talk more about
that so the Crux uh of what we need in
order to understand vulpin is that for
the intuitionist mathematics is a
descriptive science which describes
mental entities entities whose
construction occurs in time and Via
introspective processes this has
consequences for many aspects of
mathematics um includ and logic uh
certain principles for example which
will hold in classical mathematics do
not hold in intuitionistic mathematics
such as brower's own fixed Point theorem
uh and vice versa for example one of the
laws of classical Logic the law of the
excluded middle uh states that for every
proposition either that proposition or
its negation is true
um that
um so In classical mathematics to give
an example of what this means if I
assert the proposition that some string
AB c d appears in the decimal expansion
of Pi according to the law of the
excluded middle uh either this assertion
or its negation is true that is either
ABC D does exist somewhere in the
decimal expansion of Pi or it doesn't um
for the intuitionist however uh while it
is the case that if we happen in
constructing the decimal expansion of Pi
to find the sequence ABCD then we can
assign the proposition asserted above
the value of true uh there will never
come a time when we have generated a
sufficiently long decimal expansion to
decide the question
negatively um um so the the so the law
of the excluded middle is sort of
invalidated in intuitionistic logic at
least in some context um just a final
quote from
Brower uh truth is only in reality that
is in the present and past experiences
of Consciousness there are no
non-experienced
truths um
so now that that's out of the way I'm
going to talk a little bit about uh
vulpin paper the ultra intuitionistic
criticism and the anti-traditional
program for foundations of
mathematics um so this
uh this paper appeared uh in a book
called intuitionism and proof Theory
proceedings of the Summer Conference at
Buffalo in
1968 uh which was edited by Kino Mill
and Beasley um and so so like I said
vulpin immigrated to the US in 19 uh 70
I think when the conference actually
happened I'm not sure about this but he
might have been imprisoned um and so he
was set to open the conference but um uh
in his place uh hating opened the
conference and but in the book
um in the book vulpin paper uh does does
open the
book um
so vul uh
so let's see Vin's paper opens the text
oh yeah funnily enough it uh and it
appears in the New Direction section
alongside uh what's Martin L snare
famous on the notion of Randomness and
Vin's paper is extremely long or pretty
long and uh Technical and it covers a
lot of topics so I'm only going to touch
on it
csor
um just one more thing about the um
this uh book and the the conference I
mean there was a a lot of really big
names appeared uh at this conference
like I said hating kryal bernes sman
these were all people um who are part of
this conference who and whose papers are
in this book and um and it's it's it's
interesting to me that uh that Vin's
paper is at the beginning of this book
because he mostly went on to be
neglected um
vulpin uh so vulpin paper like I said
I'm I'm only going to be able to touch
on curly he begins by critiquing some
traditional assumptions made by
mathematicians and proceeds to provide a
consistency proof of ZF set Theory
without the use of infinite entities um
and if you want to learn more about that
there's a paper by Jim Geyser in the
Journal of symbolic logic that reviews
vulpin paper uh so I'm going to the
first paragraph and I think it's
interesting to keep in mind everything
um that I mentioned about Vin's
political dissidence um so here's the
first
paragraph the aim of this program is to
banish Faith from the foundations of
mathematics Faith being defined as any
violation of the law of sufficient
reason for sentences this law is defined
as the identification by definition of
Truth with the result of a present or
feasible proof in in spite of the
traditional complete incompleteness
theorems which deals with only a very
narrow kinds of proofs which I call
formal proofs I define proof as any Fair
way of making a sentence
incontestable of course this explication
is related to ethics the notion fair
means free from any coercion and
fraud uh and to the theory of disputes
indicating cases in which a sentence is
to be considered as incontestable of
course the math the methods of
mathematical logic are not sufficient
for this program and I have to enlarge
the domains of means explicitly studied
in logic so vulpin tries to shove a
bunch of things into the foundations of
mathematics like ethics and semi
semitics and um sort of modality
theories uh and linguistic theories
um uh and
um I again I'm not here to sort of
convince you to be um a vulite or an
Ultra intu
uh I'm I'm just sort of presenting it so
you can take it as you
will vulpin concern with those aspects
of an argument from which we draw our
confidence of its convincingness compels
him to study the role of linguistic
forms such as tense and voice as well as
semi semiotics like I said and what he
calls the theory of collations which
amounts to theory of um identifications
and
distinctions um the traditional
assumptions that Open begin by
criticizing are the following uh so I'm
just going to list them uh one the
uniqueness up to isomorphism of the
natural numbers two the existence of the
values of primitive recursive functions
for every system of arguments for an
arbitrary natural number series three
the principle of mathematical induction
from n to n Prime for what vulpin calls
the locality principle uh which is sort
of that uh if the axioms of a formal
system are true and the rules of
inference conserve the truth then each
theorem is true uh and five the
meaningfulness of the relation of
identity and distinction he says I
criticize these assumptions above all
simply on the grounds they are
assumptions their incontestability has
never been established and this is
sufficient reason to doubt
them uh so he goes on to show that the
locality principle and induction both
require each other and so to him form a
vicious circle at the foundations of
mathematics and um uh from this vulpen
rejects axium systems as sort of the way
to found mathematics uh he doesn't
reject explicit Employments of axium
systems but he requires that prior to
the employment of uh axum systems the
aims and rules for the construction of a
mathematical system must be specified
explicitly so aims as well as
definitions and he provides a whole he
provides at least the beginning of a of
a theory for for this
um so one of the things that if you look
up open you'll see a lot associated with
him is his uh is his assertion of the of
the non-uniqueness of uh natural number
series um so he he goes on to ask why 10
to the 12 should be considered a natural
number and shows uh because you you can
never count to it for him a natural
number is something that that you can
count to and so he sort of creates a
theory of what he calls feasible numbers
uh which are are numbers that you could
feasibly count to and I don't know how
you sort of identify what's at at like
what stops becoming a feasible number um
but but he's really he's very uh
concerned with
um with sort of foregrounding possible
Infinities uh rather than actual
Infinities which is part of why he's
concerned with modality theories uh
Because he believes that you have to
make statements about what you've
constructed in the past what it's
possible for you to construct in the
future um and things like that uh so um
so he he identifies two different kinds
of natural number series one of feasible
numbers like I just said and um the
other which corresponds to the
traditional notion of an infinite
natural number
series and he formalizes this
distinction via uh embeddings of the
latter and the former um which again he
does over a bunch of pages and it's um
more technical so I don't have that much
time to go into it but um you can uh
look this up more if you'd like uh these
possible Infinities uh or feasible
series which are being constructed
require to vulpen a modal Theory because
one speaks of what one has constructed
thus far uh what one can or cannot
possibly construct and so
forth he then continues his critique of
traditional assumptions adding the
following to the
list um so six the possibility of
neglecting modalities and aims and
Foundations seven the possibility of
neglecting rules of attention and
neglecting um and then he um uh arrives
at what he calls the atomic actions for
the foundations of
mathematics um and um I'm going to read
those off here
too so one is
preferences two s of establishing or
following Connections in particular acts
of attention three collations which are
uh identifications and distinctions
between different objects indications
which is his term for a Semitic act
which he explicates in the same
paper acceptances of
propositions
perceptions the acts inverse to the
proceeding so the inverse of each of uh
what I just read the abstention from
each of the
proceeding raising and answering
questions addressing another person and
including some text in in in memory and
then the exstension from those um he
then begins uh the constructive part of
his paper uh the consistency proof of Z
ofet Theory um which like I said you can
um look at Jim geyser's review in the
Journal of symbolic logic
um and um so that's sort of the summary
I'm going to give of his um of his text
I I find it uh compelling that this text
which um I think is extremely eccentric
uh appears in this this book um among a
bunch of well-known mathematicians and
that vulpin was uh eventually sort of um
uh there were four or five
mathematicians who really took him
seriously there was the computer
scientist Jim geyser there was uh his
proj Katherine Chris henx who he tried
to um uh somehow uh uh um contest uh
girdle's incompleteness theorems with um
and um there were there were a few
others um and Roy lisker who I mentioned
above who sort of attributed people's uh
uh not giving vulp in the time of day to
his eccentricity and their lack of
awareness about the political situation
he' come from but I don't know if that
matters or not um and uh that's all I've
got thank you
hi uh thank you Corey uh next we have uh
Christopher Brown who's the researcher
at The topos
Institute and uh I'm pleased to have
them uh participate in this conference
uh um they're going to be speaking about
inferentialism and applied category
Theory and they also uh in addition to
the work on category Theory they have an
uh um one of their passions or Hobbies
rather is uh the works of uh studying
The Works of uh brandom and sellers uh
but uh uh I'll hand it off to
Chris great thanks guys um all right
everything looking good with the screen
share you see a title slide I
hope uh
okay great so I want to talk about
inferentialism and applied category
Theory and I'll start by talking about a
quite practical problem whenever you
have cooperation going on in science you
need some sort of fixed structure a
common protocol a controlled vocabulary
a database
and there's all sorts of affordances you
can get once you have something like
that but we're immediately pulled in two
directions because it's nice to have
things to coordinate over but we might
inadvertently bake in some unknown
assumptions that we decide that we want
to change later or we're missing
something that we realize we need later
and so this this thing that was
originally liberating and letting us do
something we couldn't do before is now
controlling and restricting what we can
do so let me demonstrate this with a toy
example imagine some Proto people who
are sending each other little messages
like you know a a reacts to Form B and B
reacts to form C yada y yada if if
everyone in the world were buying into
this protocol like research papers were
just lists like this then there would be
some actually cool things you could do
you could answer questions you could
write a piece of software to answer the
question you know is anyone working on
reaction networks with A and C or is
there a pathway to get from a to d from
anyone in the world and so that's a
really cool powerful uh tool
but let's see what happens next someone
else joins and they say Okay I want to
get in on this party but when you call a
I actually call B and these two things B
and C you're talking about actually
they're both the same thing and so
there's nothing in this protocol that
gives you the ability to handle this
kind of nuance and so you end up not
collaborating and it's very realistic
that you discover things that make you
change your perspective so we might find
it actually practical to describe
certain quote unquote multi-reaction
actions which have multiple uh inputs
and multiple outputs but it would be a
lot of work to add this new data
structure and figure out how does it
play with my old notion of of reaction
uh and yeah it's neither here nor there
whether or not this is a completely new
thing or whether or not we were just
wrong about our previous notion of of
reaction there's the same practical
problem and so the general problem is
how do we find a synthesis of structure
and
flexibility and now I want to talk about
about uh another problem which might not
seem related at first which is how do we
think about semantics uh let me start
with a kind of naive status quo type
picture which is I'll call
representationalist semantics so the
story here is that we analyze a sentence
like the green frog is on the log in
terms of covertly being some sort of
logical uh expression and then we can
give semantics to uh green and frog and
log as essentially predicates that are
subsets of some set of things that there
are and this on relation is a set of
pairs of things where one thing is on
the other and now that we uh have that
it's actually a really nice tool because
I can analyze what the meaning of the
sentence is in terms of the meanings of
these uh components so this property
would be a
compositionality uh and it's really
powerful and a lot of intellectual
effort has been trying to essentially
generalize this picture to make it work
for more and more of our
talk so how you represent possibility
well then you get possible World
semantics so uh but this is at odds with
something uh called redescription that
I'll I'll give by example so it might be
part of our definition of deserve that
it's tied up with Notions of markets and
exchange and then later we realize wait
no actually there's there are these
things called rights and actually
deserving things has to do with that and
we we changed we were wrong but uh we
want to say that it's not that we have
deserves Prime now and we're just
talking about something different we
want to say that our notion of deserve
has actually changed and more concretely
we have a notion of cat that uh is very
tied up with being a mammal uh they both
it's it's essential to being a cat that
you're a mammal uh but we're also in
principle open to the idea that future
scientists you know really look hard at
their DNA and say nope actually cats are
aliens and so we were wrong about
something but but what were we wrong
about if if we can't be wrong about our
definitions then we were wrong because
there actually are no cats but it seems
more natural to say no we are we we we
got the definition wrong and that's the
sort of thing that can't happen if your
notion of meaning is tied to these types
of definitions this sort of thing
happens all the time in science where we
redescribe our old vocabulary uh you
know things that were contingently true
become essential and things that were
true just become approximately true and
you know we don't want to be committed
to the idea that no one in the 19th
century was ever referring to actual
electrons because then we're we're
really doomed to skepticism because
we're always open to the idea that
future scientists will will show
something that was wrong about our
current
theories and I I don't want this to be
limited to just I don't know moral
epiphanies or uh empirical findings even
in mathematics uh there's lots of
different ways you could conceptualize
what a triangle is uh maybe someone took
it essential that it was a polygon with
180 degrees and accidentally something
with you know three uh points that are
non-colinear
but it turns out throughout the
development of math that one of those
definitions actually made more sense for
generalizing so that we can actually
talk about Bonafide you know non- ukian
triangles as opposed to non- ucan
Triangle primes because we we can't use
the word triangle again so these
examples should remind you of the first
problem where we want to sort of
redefine reaction as we learned more
with our current definition of reaction
and if we don't have this ability to
redescribe you know we're trapped in
backwards ways of thinking we're not
prepared if cats are aliens our
scientific vocabulary doesn't refer to
the real world and math becomes oied so
we need another a middle way and clearly
we do address this problem in practice
but we want a semantic theory that
actually is compatible with the fact
that we can deal with these
problems so the point of this talk is to
just talk about two seemingly completely
different approaches to this problem uh
and uh I hope to draw out some
similarities between those two
approaches so uh the first first one is
going to talk about category Theory so
for a context like this uh I can't
really get into all of the definitions
involved but I hope to provide some
intuition uh that you can do keyword
search later if you're interested so for
for present purposes category Theory
it's a it's a branch of math it focuses
on relationships between between things
rather than the things themselves uh a
category has objects and arrows and
because category Theory can not really
talk about the objects directly its
definitions really are about certain
shapes of arrows so we might give a name
called a span to this shape of arrows
that has two two outward arrows and
these could also we could give names to
certain Global properties such as if
there's an object that has exactly one
Arrow into every other object in the
category we can call it zero we could
call it an initial object and we've now
characterized what that is by this
property and the fundamental kind of
relationship that we care about and this
is the most complex piece of category
theory that will be in this talk so I'll
just say that a funter is a way of
relating two different categories to
each other uh it's an assignment of the
objects and arrows of one category in
the other in a way that respects the
local structure so you could think of it
as like a good analogy you're you're
preserving the the order and connection
of things and so we might think of you
know the original application of
category Theory category theory is
always applied category Theory it's just
the original application was internal to
mathematics itself so if C were some
sort of algebraic uh space of things and
D or some more geometric topic then this
functor from algebra into geometry is
going to essentially allow us to
systematically talk about geometry using
the language of algebra and that just
turns out to be a really convenient
thing so the power of category Theory to
abstract comes from the fact that its
definitions can really be applied in any
category so now that I've defined
initial object in this way I can now go
to any category I can talk about you
know sets and functions I can talk about
graphs I can talk about matrices and I
can say what it means to be an initial
object in that context and so in
particular you might say that category
the doesn't have a proper subject matter
itself uh it's but it allows you to make
pre-existing structure that exists in
all sorts of other places
explicit so the story for solving that
initial problem I posed uh is has to do
with functorial semantics so let me it's
all captured in this picture let me try
to explain it so we have multiple
theories uh T1 T2 T3 and we're going to
think of those theories as categories
themselves and furthermore there's going
to be another category called s which is
going to be our semantics category very
common this category is the category of
sets and functions so let's think what
it means to give a functor from your
theory into the category of semantics of
set it means for every single object in
your theory you're assigning some sort
of set and for every morphism in your
theory you're assigning a function so
this has some interesting properties one
we're not confined to a single theory in
order to be uh meaningful uh we're also
not confined to a fixed semantics like
the set of real things or the set of
subatomic particle Arrangements uh and
importantly these theories are related
to each other so we have arrows between
these theories so there's actually a
category of theories and we can use that
to ergonomically and rationally move
from one Theory to
another uh and I'll note that this space
of theories itself is not just this
completely fixed god-given thing uh it's
uh when something that plays this role
is called a Doctrine and there are other
sorts of doctrines you could have and uh
you can trust that there are ways of
relating those doctrines to each other
and so we can also flexibly move between
those if we properly contextualize what
the doctrine we're talking about is but
we can stop at any point and just take
that as some sort of
given so this is the story but I think
it won't be clear unless I give really
concrete examples of what does T1 and S
and what do these dashed arrows look
like so let me actually get into some of
this so uh an example scientific model
for the examples we're talking about
might be a petrinet so a petrinet has a
set of species it has a set of
Transitions and it has input and output
arcs going in between those and so you
could think of this as a Syntax for
chemical reaction networks so we think
of these blue circles as chical species
the boxes as chemical reactions and
these inputs and outputs tell you how
many of each molecule is actually the
reactant or the product and so an
interesting thing is that this whole
Space of possible Petr Nets is itself
the category of models of a particular
Theory so let's go back so there I'm
saying there is some fixed Theory and if
we look at all of the possible functors
into the category of sets what we're
going to recover is precisely this
notion of this space of models of
petrinet given this Theory so to unpack
that let me start with graphs because
graphs are as we seen a bit simpler than
petrinet so graphs the theory of graphs
really is a category that has two
objects we'll call it the edge object
the vertex object and there's two
morphisms it's called source and Target
and now we can ask well what is a model
of this Theory well it's a functor into
set which means we're going to assign a
set of edges a set of vertices and we're
going to have functions that tell us
what each edges source and targe is and
so this is what the this particular
model might look like as you know a pair
of sets this is what it looks like uh as
a graph next and then lastly we have if
it were interpreted as a chemical
reaction network uh then this is what
the reaction Network would
be so now we can talk about Petr Nets
Petr Nets are slightly more complicated
where the theory or the schema for
petrin Nets is a category with four
objects uh transitions species inputs
outputs and these corresponding
morphisms and so if we look at a
particular example of this we'll see you
know one transition two species two
inputs one output and the actual
functions will tell us that what it
really means is that a plus a goes to
B so now returning back to our our
picture we've now seen uh what T1 and T2
might look like we've seen what s is and
we've seen what these dashed lines mean
so now how do we actually use this to
flexibly move when we realize that we're
wrong and need to actually change our
our perspective in a in a systematic
rational way so what we need a
systematic way of turning graphs into
Petr Nets is a functor from this
category of graphs to petrinet so
importantly it's not just a function
that gives you a petronet for every
graph but it's does it in a systematic
way that preserves the relationships
between graphs within the relationships
between petran so we need something like
that in order to systematically move all
of our infrastructure and our code from
working with graphs to working with Petr
units uh but this is a massive amount of
data there's an infinite number of
graphs there's so many so many morphisms
so uh this is like quite impractical to
to specify naively but a conceptually
legible way of packaging this is to say
no we merely need a funter between the
two schemas so uh if we go back to here
there are arrows between these theories
well these theories are categories so
it's natural that these arrows are
functors and we're going to use a funter
at the schema level to actually induce
the right notion of a funter between
models so here's a particular funter
we're sending species to vertex and
we're sending everything else in the
petronet schema to the edge table so
Category 3 provides these Notions of
functorial data migrations that actually
allow you to obtain these functors
purely as a function of these schema mat
level
functors and uh this is really useful
because we've essentially found a the
right way to redescribe our graph
vocabulary as petrinet vocabulary
because we're inter in edges as
transitions that happen to have one
input and output so uh this is all tied
up to con extensions and adint functors
if you want to look those up but this is
the basic idea and a lot of what we do
uh in during my day job is to actually
make this computable so that you can
actually you know run this and change
your code to work from graphs to working
on Petron Nets I'll say one more thing
about applied category Theory which is
that uh it's kind of orthogonal which is
that there's really an emphas empasis on
open systems so before we can think of a
petronet as a closed system because
there's no explicit interface or
boundary but we could think of a
petronet as a morphism from one boundary
to another and so those boundaries are
basically related to certain species and
the petrinet and now if you have two uh
petrinet open Petr Nets that share a
boundary you can actually glue them
together and get a new Petr net so if we
think of assigning semantics not to Petr
Nets but to open petronet we actually
get again a really cool idea that we can
uh be committed to some sort of model
but still be open to new possibilities
that that we don't yet know yet so you
can do this with like assigning a
reachability semantics to these
individual things and compose them to
get reachability for uh the overall
model so just to summarize the the key
takeaway points of how applied category
theory was useful for this original
problem we work with external structure
rather than internal structure uh
categories are essentially making uh
pre-existing structure explicit and I
didn't get to talk about this Rich field
of categorical logic which says you can
do intuitionistic logic classical logic
uh higher order logic in any category if
it has enough structure for it so this
is a kind of logical pluralism that just
comes right out of categorical logic
there's an emphasis on open systems uh
you can reason within a theory while
still retaining flexibility uh something
interesting is that syntax and semantic
are just both categories they're not two
ontologically fundamentally different
things and that means you can actually
have your semantics be the Syntax for
another
theory uh and lastly I think it gives
you there's lots of different ways you
could get a notion of redescription out
of category Theory but one particular
one is this notion of functorial data
migration uh next I want to change gears
and talk about inferentialism luckily
Ryan gave a great introduction to this
so I can rely on that a bit uh it's
broadly a class of theories that try to
understand reference in terms of this
conceptually prior notion of inferential
role and so there isn't any direct
conflict with the earlier picture of the
Frog on the log as representational uh
we still can and ought think of it that
way uh however in terms of an
overarching view of propositional
content we want to then understand those
representational relations in terms of
for example the role that frog and log
and observational reports in general
play and so rather than an atomistic
picture of Concepts having reference
which then gives sense to sentences
which then tells us which inferences are
good it goes the other direction you you
have a notion of good judgment and from
that you try to understand what it is
we're talking about so the Paradigm case
as Ryan showed was uh uh that clearly
this is a good story for logical
vocabulary uh to understand and is
really to just understand these
circumstances of application and
consequences of application uh and the
challenge is can we do this with
ordinary Concepts to and for this I'll
be drawing from a recent book by uh ol
Lobel and Robert random uh and try to
highlight some moves that I think uh
have some at least superficial
similarity to the story I just told
before so to get into it uh we care
about inferences but inferences between
what we we start with a lexicon which is
a set of claimes and we can construct
positions like a Turn Style CD which is
a notion of implication or a Turn Style
nothing which is a way of encoding
incompatibility and and so we have this
space of possible implications which is
the the power set squared and an
implication frame then and we
suggestively call it a vocabulary is a
lexicon equipped with a distinguished
subset of these implications which we're
endorsing and restal is going to suggest
that we uh interpret this as a claim of
incoherence namely that gamma Turn Style
Delta uh endorsing that is to say that
uh rejecting all of Delta and accepting
all of gamma is an incoherent out of
bounds position
so let me give some examples to show how
broad this notion of vocabulary is uh
you could have these very Niche specific
types of vocabulary such as a
theological vocabulary where it does
follow that if it's Pious then it's
loved by the gods it doesn't matter if
those have reference in a a scientific
vocabulary or not uh we also have our
pre-existing pre theoretical notion of
just what is a good reason for what and
we can call this a notion of material
inference or ordinary ordinary language
inference and from that it is a good
inference that Pittsburgh is to the west
of New York uh to New York is to the
east of
Pittsburgh there's something else you
could do with this which is you could uh
have the Lexicon of first order logic
with some generators and in that lexicon
you have a particular element which is
for all MN east of y y yada is
equivalent to west of NM and so these
are just particular claimes but in uh
first order logic you can then deduce
that it is incoherent for to accept C
while rejecting A and B and there's a
particular pathology which says that uh
I have to analyze my ordinary language
inferences in terms of this this kind of
first order logic system but there's no
need to do that I mean these are just
both different types of
vocabularies and so the motivating idea
of logical expressivism is that what
logic is doing is not underwriting our
claims of good reasons but it's actually
making them explicit so gamma entails uh
a material implies B is saying that
gamma and a is sufficient for B and or
that it's incoherent to reject B and
accept Delta in in uh a and so how do we
make this work well we can extend any
base lexicon to include logically
complex claimes and not this is quite
different from the the logic on this
slide because this logic is internal to
the claimes which is invisible to the
the implication frame but this is now
going to be legible explicit uh uh uh
syntax such as the claimable A and the
claimable B and uh what then are we
supposed to do with the reason relations
the sort of implications that involve uh
these logically complex bearers so we're
introducing new new elements new claimes
and now we need to know well how do I
know if it's a good inference or not and
it's important to know that uh if we
were to go about this and a naive way we
might end up with something that's
called not harmonious so it's possible
to make rules for connectives such that
you can deduce things that weren't true
originally so the the most classic
example of this is Tonk where I can
derive anything if I introduce a tonk
connective and this is clearly bad this
isn't the type of thing that is logical
we want to be able to observe something
without changing it so uh there's this
perspective that logic should be LX
elaborated from a base vocabulary but
also expressive of it and so classical
logic is LX for certain types of
implication frames but not all
implication frames and so what we want
is something that's universally
LX and so to just reiterate what logical
expressivism expressivism is by
contrasting it with its Converse which
uh is called logicism there's a question
of what should logic even be about and
there's a perspective that well you
should just study purely logical
sentences uh ignore uh no content of
non-logical things should factor in but
logical expressivism wants to understand
the relationship between contentful
non-logical vocabulary and logical
vocabulary uh there's the question of uh
the relationship between reason
relations and logical vocabulary and one
is that uh you should be reducible to
logical vocabulary and the other is that
you should be expressable by logical
vocabulary the perspective on
non-logical content is that it's not
really possible to have genuine you know
material inferences there's they're just
incompletely specified logical
inferences whereas you might want to say
no there is something to the concept of
cruel there is the the idea that birds
can fly there's something to that even
if it's a diffusible inference and the
search for generality ends up going from
trying to just find this covert logical
syntax underlying our in ordinary talk
to trying to find a logic which is
universally
LX now this is not a technical talk so I
want to say just declare that that there
is a proposed uh logically universally
LX
uh uh system uh which they call
non-monotonic multi succedent logic
which is conservative for all
implication frames and a powerful
representation theorem will tell you
that uh this gives us enough vocabulary
to make uh the underlying base
vocabulary and its reason relations
explicit so once that's been done though
there's something further that's done uh
in this work which is uh putting syntax
and semantics on the same playing field
so what I told you was just a story
about our talk you know saying claiming
certain things and certain things being
in bounds or out of bounds and so the
opposite perspective is to say uh you
know the representationalist picture is
to say nope there are things that we
refer to with our talk and that's what
underwrites what we say and a sort of uh
Paradigm of that would be truthmaker
Theory which generalizes possible World
semantics uh and it does this with a
notion of worldly in in a hyper
intentional in a way that means you can
distinguish meanings that are still true
in all the same possible worlds such as
1 plus 1al 2 and that three is Prime and
so the mechanics of this which I won't
be able to get into in a non-technical
talk is that you have a notion of
worldly States combining States and
possible States and you understand uh
gamma Turn Style Delta as there aren't
any possible state that makes uh gamma
true and every sentence and Delta false
so just stating a punchline is that uh
there's a sort of Duality and
isomorphism between the nmms system from
before and this truthmaker Theory and
that you can actually move back and
forth quite fluidly and this is really
interesting because it puts these two
things that are normally very different
worlds on a par and that you can be an
inferentialist about anything as long as
you have a notion of compatibility or
incompatibility uh something else that I
want to stress about this this
perspective from this book is that it
focuses on open reason relations so
normally we think of The Logical
consequence relation as something that's
closed when you take consequences of
something if you take consequences again
that doesn't add anything new and when
you add new premises all you do is
strictly add new conclusions uh new new
things that you can draw and that forces
you right from the outset to be
committed to this idea that nothing
changes if we can derive something and
then add it back in as a premise it must
have already been a premise all along
but this is really at odds with
something that's crucial to rationality
which is that we can derive consequences
which when we accept them they actually
allow us to derve new things we might
invalidate things that we took to be
true and we can Rectify earlier con
contradictions and so the idea of
explosion is really implausible when you
start talking about non-logical
conceptual contents and so this is
relevant to science because we use
theories to extract consequences from
data and this data can make us change
our theories and then our Theory allows
us to extract even new consequences and
so for for example we want to be able to
make sense of that gamma and a let's say
a is our our Theory uh gamma and a
allows us to drive B and C but if we add
that back in we get a contradiction now
we're in a crisis perhaps and now but we
realize that B and C actually mutually
so support each other but don't support
a and actually our new theory is going
to be B and C and so this is the sort of
thing that we can express and and show
how this progression is rational that
was just not expressible uh if you're
committed to this closed reason relation
uh
perspective and I talked about how
compositionality was this sort of uh
nice property of of the
representationalist picture uh and we
can say it obeys a strong
compositionality property where knowing
every mentioned small sentence in in fi
is going to enable knowing this complex
sentence
fi there's a weaker but non-trivial
compositionality property of uh
inferentialism which is that knowing all
the small sentences lets you know all
the complex sentences so if I know the
reason relation of the base vocabulary I
can know the logically extended
vocabulary
and so uh I won't be able to get into uh
uh the formal definition of implication
space semantics but the idea is that the
semantics that were assigned to these
things uh in inferentialism is not uh
some fixed set but it's actually an
entire uh uh a range of subjunctive
robustness the role that we assign uh
gamma Turn Style Delta is going to be
all the implications for which we can
add Gamma Delta to and it makes it a
good implication and so with this kind
of perspective we can assign recursive
uh definitions semantic definitions
which is good I consider that a good
form of compositionality the downside is
these roles themselves uh are defined
holistically I mean the role involves
all the possible uh implications of the
base vocabulary so trade-off it's a bit
harder or a lot harder I might say to
compute actually with these things and
the way it's easy to compute with a uh
closed
reation so I hope I've drawn some
similarities and if not I I'll make them
explicit here there are some
similarities between the applied
category Theory story and this logical
expressivist story there's a focus on
making pre-existing structure explicit
content is being defined in terms of
external structure rather than
internally uh logical structure is
exists it's special uh and it's useful
but it's it's not guaranteed and so
there's a kind of pluralism about the
right logic uh traditional thinking
about logic is good useful but it's not
useful as a foundation
uh there's an emphasis on open systems
or open reason relations uh we can
theoretically ground some Norms uh that
are binding without requiring some fixed
foundations uh syntax and semantics I
think are in in different ways put put
on a par and rather than having this
fundamental Gulf between these just two
completely different types of things and
I think that in both situations we have
a way of making sense of
redescription so thank you for listening
and I appreciate the convers ation I've
had with people at topos uh as well as
Ryan Olen B
thanks Stan is a philosopher and an
author most recently of intelligence and
spirit on urbanomic sequence press he
directs the critical philosophy program
at the new center for research and
practice thank you Eric uh thank you
everyone uh my apologies um I meant
to prepare uh you know some notes uh
transfer some notes but given the
condition with this hand unfortunately I
failed so I'm going to uh give a very
short talk uh you know and try as much
as uh I can to read only a few citations
that would be
all
uh uh so uh what I would like to uh talk
about and particularly given the
description of the confurence and the
menion of Gabrielle's work uh Gabrielle
katan's
work uh is uh essentially a deeper look
into the phenomenological
project and how
um within the hosan critique of the
Canan distinction between phenomenon and
nenon whoel uh you know foray into the
distinction between
noesis NOA or no mat and transcendental
objects uh within a certain sort of
methodology of
philosophy uh which would constitute the
backbone of the project of
phenomenology
um converge Upon A Certain sort of
curious uh what you might call to be
uh uh computational and complexity
conundrums uh which truly understood uh
can be uh taken or considered as various
way of uh looking at the problem of
nenon uh after the computational
turn right uh a transcendental
philosophy and a transcendental
skepticism U but now equipped uh with
the computational turn of the 20th
century ongoing to through Modern
revolutions uh of logic uh theoretical
Computer Science and Mathematics I try
as best as I can to abide by uh you know
approximations um so no one uh uh you
know expert knowledge would be offended
in the process
so first and foremost uh Eric can I uh
share a couple of
diagrams do I have that
functionality I think Eric is missing
so
um just one second oh sure sure
absolutely you should be able
to excellent uh one second so it's
uh share okay
does everyone see
this sorry I can't
okay excellent so the there are two
diagrams uh one what you might call to
be the diagram of transcendental
hylomorphism which would be
hell's
uh prevailingly neoc Canan critique of
C uh a specific type of hylomorphism
this is the first
diagram we have the poles of subject and
object reflexivity and
reference which in can would be that
perceptive self and first order outer
appearances thus and so organize for
objects you know of mind and
Sensibility which then would break into
uh a different
uh sort of uh categories no longer in
terms of phenomenon and nenon um but
rather in terms of uh nois and
noata or NOA uh in a sense of a of a
deep entanglement uh between acts of
Consciousness and objects of
Consciousness and these objects of
Consciousness might not be of
Consciousness as in usually the cas case
with Transcendent certain sort of
transcendental objects or Transcendent
objects and then we see the this
distinction uh or the problem of uh
can
sorry the the problem of transcendental
hylomorphism uh Tri furiates uh into
sin citation noesis uh
and uh semantic Conta
Kum no transcendental
object and logic of Truth or
signification or cognition being uh What
uh bring them
together and the procedure of
how essentially H uh achieves at this
rectification to cans
idea of phenomenon appearances uh to
nenon um undertakes this methodology to
achieve this
result uh is by way of as we know a
radicalization of the prenal concern of
philosophy
meaning a fundamental
synthesis or
entanglement between lus and appearances
of different kind
ionus
aasia and idolan right various forms of
uh appearances of the kind which pertain
to
um the first two segments of the analogy
of the divided line in
Plato's
work the metodology is a radicalized
cartisian one precisely it takes
philosophical
meditation uh to a different
height uh as we know
um
decart in his meditations also
reinvigorate this gesture of philosophy
of the synthesis between logos and
appearances in a different sort of way
in meditations uh from the first to the
sixth meditation nowel taking it to a
different uh scale by radicalizing
even uh decart's form of
meditation and when I'm saying
meditation here obviously we are talking
about uh doubt a special kind of doubt
it's not ponic or academic sort of Doubt
but a special kind of doubt and also a
very Co
coherentist uh
logic of I the speaker right
Consciousness
Consciousness or um eye
poles as we see it in deart sometimes
when in throughout the course of
meditations he writes sometimes the ey
is biographical sometimes I simply
stands for a philosopher
sometimes it is merely uh a logical Act
Right an elementary logical act in order
for it uh in order for it to be posited
to be counteracted by another
eye right a logic of interaction so to
speak
and the name for uh What uh this
radicalized cartisian method of
meditation is in hosel to
tackle the problem of phenomenon noma in
terms of this
uh Three Forks of uh you know
uh quation
cognition
patum nois no transcendental uh or
Transcendent objects would be R frag
questioning back stripping back that the
only way that we can as uh you know
Plato would have probably agreed uh
particularly in his later works maybe
not even in Republic he would have
agreed uh that the only way that we can
understand
uh give a thoroughgoing analysis of all
appearances and that's exactly what
phenomenology means forel the
thoroughgoing and system itic analysis
of all
appearances a descriptive analysis so to
speak such that we can strip back
meaning question
back uh behind this appear uh
disappearances while never go astray
from you know pretending that we are
doing something else as opposed to you
know um entertain
in a version of intellectual or rational
Intuition or Supernatural faculty uh so
on and so forth would be ruk FR uh
stripping back questioning back uh
towards uh foundations but these
foundations are not Givens right there
are not data in any sort of uh ways that
people usually in the salarian
philosophy uh POS them precisely because
the methodology of R
requires
um uh a movement in tandem with a
certain sort of conceptual
explication right so it's concept play
in uh throughout it's not it does not
strive to
uh essenti
um forfeit
uh the linguistic conceptual
Labor uh in order to achieve uh certain
sort of Foundations allow the Givens
ideological fixations in a kind of a
salarian sort of way of various kind
epistemological
categorical uh so on so
forth now if we
stretch the diagram above uh this
diagram would kind of look like this in
the essential understanding of pel's
idea of
phenomenology namely uh the analysis uh
the descriptive analysis of all
appearances
right but in Canan terms
um their condition of possibility their
uh fundamental condition of
possibility was essentially
uh n uh as a condition of possibility uh
epistemological uh particularly in the
vein of epist transcendental deduction
uh that to say why is that these
experiences uh are exactly as they are
right or do and
so right
so if we stretch it out uh the kind of
vertical diagram above into kind of a
flat map it would be uh something like
this it is uh it it pertains to the
experience of being in the world right
and hence no
noesis uh becomes the expression of
being in the
world you know as opposed to a
um of this Canan
dichotomy uh that there is a thing in
itself and there are
appearances or
um a form of uh you
know essentially uh kind of a flat
picture uh of
subjectivity uh which would lead into a
form of transcendental
solipsism
right uh so jel wants to he understands
that uh by definition the problems of
transcendental philosophy as defined by
a
c
uh have their origin uh in a form of
transcendental
solipsism the question of subject
conscious subject the one who sees the
appearances see them or see of them and
see them as
right
um bosel doesn't
want to end up in this sort of Canan
straight jacket or flat Orthodox
scism by uh understanding that this is
the experience of being in the world
being in the world right which from a
different sort of perspective
perspective now that is a very
interesting uh thing from the noematic
Pole right than the noetic pole from the
noematic
pole the experience of being in the
world
translates
into the world in its absolute sense
right technically
speaking
having a self-expression a localized
self-expression of
itself right which that would count as
the idea of
manifestation
appearances uh always come uh with a
form of manifestation and
manifestation is
uh ultimately has fundamental
experiential
connotations so being in the
world uh on
the noetic
poll has as its
Counterpoint or counter Poole the
self-expression of the world in its
absolute
sense that
world not wealth uh here but the UN
wealth expresses
itself manifests itself in a local uh or
in a localized uh perspective and this
perspective within which manifestation
unfolds and hence experience takes
place uh what you might call to be the
problem of Consciousness a problem of uh
subjectivity and hence a problem of
phenomenon without
having uh you know the necessity to
insert the word Nan
here in in its Canan sense at the very
least in in this Canan in his pure Canan
sense so in a way the subject from this
sort of perspective would be a kind of a
local perspective
operator of the UN unto
itself
right my apologies let
me stop
sharing this brings
us to this idea
that within uh you know the tradition of
philosophy at least
as wasel has been radicalizing decart
and decart in the name of enlightenment
has been radicalizing the fundamental
message of philosophy
itself I would
say that the question then it is not
um shallow it is actually a very deep
sort of question deep in a sense that
subject but it's very
constitution in the sense of
the act that constitutes it and what it
constitutes right kind of St austinian
puzzle uh which was loves it to to
really talk about the problem of
Consciousness uh by way of you know the
problem of inner time
Consciousness uh is the time uh
constitut
or experience of time is constituted or
it's
constituting right
and when
hosel approaches the problem of
subjectivity through this sort of
angle in in the philosophical
tradition it seems that the the subject
now somehow um being
deepened we don't have that sort of
shallow subject that is usually the
subject of our natural attitudes or
psychological attitudes toward the
subject not even
transcendental uh attitudes uh which are
made of
uh what you might call to be inflexible
or firm
types right hence uh you know various
versions of Orthodox
clanism but rather
uh the depth of the subject can be
properly
understood in terms of
phenomenology understood as the
synthesis between logos and appearances
you
know which came first sort of uh
question austinian tradition did the egg
come first or the chicken first is a
time that is constitut
or time experience of time is being
constituted right and to show that
entanglement here is fundamental for the
understanding of the problem of the
subject and hence by definition uh
the the the
question of who is I who is a
philosopher who is talking here right
who who is in the
nowhere who is
making thus and so judgments who are
making thus and so mathematical uh you
know um
structures
and this this is I think is very
interesting precisely
because once in a very allegory called
met metaphorical way the subject is
being shown to be a local perspective of
the
abyss of the unwed
itself looking back or inflecting back
at
itself from a local
perspective which shall be which shall
be onmed according to seral to expand
this experience the self-
manifestation of the unth onto the
subject and subject onto the
um is something that um for some time uh
in the tradition of
complexity sciences and uh certain
circles in computer science and
algorithmic information Theory uh people
have been talking about um this is
often refer to
um by various names I mean there are
different measures of complexity but one
of them which is of a particular
interest here to understand the meaning
of this depth the depth of the
subject right with regard to the
question of the transcendental
philosophy and also the project of uh
phenomenology would be logical depth as
defined by Charles
Bennett computer scientist uh physicist
Charles Bennett and
then later on in a much more condensed
but enlightening
way um expounded by Paul vitany computer
scientist Paul vitany and mingle in uh
their uh Masterpiece uh an introduction
to kmog of
complexity so I want to just give a very
uh Bri
Paul V and mingle's uh idea of a logical
depth for us to understand that look
this
depth uh
itself the depth of the subject which is
the depth of the
phenomenon that can be extended to
something what you might call to be a
nomenon but the nenon we don't need in
fact uh the concept of nenon the and
sense uh to account for this depth right
we can actually go different sort of
ways to talk about this such as what
waser
does um such as what deart did you know
as a progenitor of philosophy of
Enlightenment and what did Plato did as
a certain sort of progenitor of uh a
specific kind of philosophy but at the
very least if you want to do go and make
a connection of this in order to whether
allegorically metaphorically or even
technically understand this in
computational sense from the perspective
of complexity we can formulated it as
follows this is uh this is what they say
one may consider a book a number Theory
difficult or deep the book will list a
number of IAL theorems of number Theory
however it has very low colog of
complexity since all theorems are
derivable from the initial few
definitions our estimates of the
difficulty or depth of the book is the
part of the
information in it the
existence of a deep book is itself
evidence of primes
being broadcasted to outer space to
outer space since it is deemed deep
enough to prove to aliens that it arose
as a result of a long Evolution this
obviously um as many of you might notice
is a reference to the science fiction
movie contact uh which is based on I
think a novel by Carl s you know were
basically aliens which sorry human hum
receive a message which then they notice
that it is in a sequence of prime
numbers
so from the point of view of an
investigator a sequence is deep if it
yields its Secrets only slowly in fact
in another part of the book they compare
the Deep
object or the deep subject
they call it a deep object object here
meaning only in a computational sense uh
of a structure right structure that or a
message uh that once we try to put it
together once we try to organize it
assemble it give it a structure it would
take uh a long time uh for it to develop
right and long time obviously we mean it
in Tandon with computational energy and
cost right and so they compare this with
a message in a b that reveals itself
that comes out of the bottle very very
slowly or in fact extracting it from the
bottle would take a very long time
meaning
that the Deep object meaning the problem
here that we are talking about that the
subject is a manifestation of a deep
object in
itself right the the own
wealth and the its local perspective
back inflected back into it so the Deep
object would be
uh essentially
requires a very long time for the
subject to be able to decode it
requiring
computational cost energy sort of
sacrifice metabolism it can be
translated to other sort of avenues
if we take the computational cost and
energy
seriously um so in that
sense Paul vitany and Ming Lee
introduced a deep object and this goes
on for you know uh a number of other
Pages
uh they they
introduce uh the Deep
object as sort of
organization which can only be
revealed through a very specific
route and once this specific root which
we call it the deep subject start to
expand its range of
experiences right namely expand the
range of manifestations of the deep
object the Deep objects slowly starts to
get decoded the message gets slowly get
decoded
so they continue that Bennett's uh
Charles Bennett's logical depth is a
necessary number of steps in the
deductive or causal path connecting an
object with its plausible
origin formally it is the time required
by a universal computer to compute the
object from its compressed original
description it turns out that it's quite
subtle to give a formal definition of
depth depth here they have again talked
about this in number of other occasions
and so as many other commentators depth
it is literally here is in reference to
the hermeneutical
depth as
hence early example uh of a book a
shallow book or difficult book right and
the hermeneutical depth here is
precisely in the tradition of
phenomenology uh we see it from
uh to haiger to gamir and so on so
forth uh so from this perspective I
think the question then remains uh what
are the sort of techniques te what are
the sort of methods or meditations
philosop radicalized philosophical
meditations a political
or scientific mathematical or logical
kinds we can have in order to broaden
you know
the uh the
range of the unw self
manifestation which would be tanton to
the range
of subjects possible new
experiences
diversification uh of experiential types
namely transcendental types thank you so
much
thank you
Reza um and uh I guess now we we'll have
the question and answer uh section the
concluding the conference uh 30 minutes
question
answer um for any of the speakers uh
that spoke
today feel free to ask him
so I'm just wondering if uh if you have
anything to say about the recession of
LJ
browers
uh uh ential Tu theory for constructing
and Continuum the recession of that
within um professional mathematics and
similarly with uh yes an involement
claims of having
Prov and also his proof that three is
number could you say a little bit about
his sort of the retion of those IDE
just to kind of complete view
of
yes
John so everyone
okay yeah I was just curious if if you
might um say a few things about LJ
brower's Tu uh construction of the
Continuum for found ations how that was
received by the um the profession and
similarly with yes and vulpin his uh
claim to have
um uh proved the incompleteness theorem
complete and his claim that three is a
infinite
number like just how was he received by
the um brower's formulation of the
Continuum as far as I know uh um well
brower's whole program was formalized by
his
students uh uh most notably orent hating
and um uh Brower was a solipsist and a
Mystic and his students and his teachers
were uh majorly embarrassed by his uh
mysticism and so I mean I think in
general uh the uh Community or or
mathematicians The Establishment
whatever uh is is kind of trying uh to
um slice and dice for hours uh uh
creating subject uh as fast as possible
uh I think the idea now is that it's
sort of equated with a computer um and
I'm not sure that Brower would have
equated it with a computer um there
weren't computers at the time
uh um so mostly I think his student
hating had uh had had more sort of that
was accepted by uh by established
mathematicians and then uh vulpin uh
claimed to have proved the inconsistency
theorems consistent I don't actually
know that much about that I know he
focused on his with his student Chris
henx and that they put uh a considerable
amount of uh work into it but I don't
think that it really had a readership uh
in the United States so I'm not sure
that it really went anywhere uh and then
as for vulpin idea that um three is an
infinite number I actually um have not
specifically come across that idea the
what I came across was that uh he
believed that they were uh sort of
different different um types of uh
natural number series and maybe that's
connected but um he like I said there
were the feasible natural number series
um and then the sort of traditional
natural number series and um I I guess
there's maybe some well he's he's
essentially saying that 10 to the 12 is
an infinite number so he's not saying
that three is an infinite number in the
example I know but he's saying he's kind
of creating two two different kinds of
um two different types of infinity which
is like a a feasible infinity and then a
um and then an infeasible infinity or or
maybe like an Infinity that could be
completed by a computer
uh this one is for raaza I was uh
wondering if you would say I looked at
the center of the first diagram where
you have an impersonal kind of
representation where everything expands
outwards and then you know sub um
transcendental uh subjects have their
own part in the corner of the in the
other edges of the diagram would you say
that uh those representations talked
about in the center of the diagram are
basically the same idea as what bergson
would call an image or are there caveats
that are
missing um may I ask why burkson uh here
because of because of there is a certain
sort of uh kind of like a dynamic
dynamicity here there or in what
sense I'm thinking of bergson in matter
and memory speaking of uh of trying to
avoid either idealism or realism and
talking about the imagees this uh
neutral thing um that exists like in a
uh in like a single uh univocal
ontology yes yes in in that sense
absolutely images by their definitions
should overcome either uh idealism or
any other sort of the other pole that's
that's the whole point of the image and
Plato was very specific about the nature
of images right it's in the
um U analogy of the divided line that
they uh that they are between uh uh
certain sort of
memories and certain sort of matter
right not any sort of memory so people
if they say that memory as an empirical
Trace memory yeah that would be just
like going back uh to to the other route
as opposed to the idealism right of the
images and we see it with being done
today in terms in in the name of I don't
know uh artificial intelligence pattern
recognition so on and so forth right um
but if uh we also think about memory in
terms of uh uh the problem of
unforgetting
unlearning Amis right uh remembrance
then yes absolutely uh that would be
would be the ideal the ideal really from
the platonic Oran mology to address the
question of
images yeah this is for Reda um I really
was taken by your diagrams and uh they
kind of like reminded me of like Ean
araby and like kind of like the sort of
like cosmological diagrams and stuff
like suie mysticism just wondering if
you like engage with that at all if you
like I don't know uh no I'm but I'm
completely familiar with them yes
absolutely they are more like I would
say
um um I'm not sure if you are you looked
at works
of alh right the father of
Optics uh so yes I would say that rather
plagiarized from uh alhazen's Optical
diagrams these are Optical diagrams
absolutely hosel also has musical
diagrams Plato has Optical diagrams but
yes absolutely they can actually uh fit
together uh like a a hand and a fit
glove absolutely yeah yeah know I just
thought it was a like beautiful kind of
extension of that tradition and like
yeah it's cool to see someone like
actively engaging in that um yeah and
just kind of like using image like to
communicate like these kind of like
really big Concepts that are like yeah
just like kind of uh just cool to see
that so yeah no no absolutely there is a
there is a there fundamental underground
resistance uh after Plato and no
platonism against um you know uh the
rather the dark ages of Aristotelian
scholasticism throughout the Middle Ages
which are fundamentally concerned with
diagram just as Plato was right Plato
was the greatest diagram everything that
he says all the architecture of
everything in his dialogues are
diagrammatic by by their fundamental
nature and also know plonis and then it
goes to people like nicool
orim Oxford Merton College paris's
school you know the first people who
essentially doubled uh in uh
invention of uh differential equations
of motion you know leading to the
enlightenment to Day cards and cernus
and then onwards yeah so there is a a
fundamental philosophical input the
nature of these
diagrams thanks thank
you um I'm not
I'm not sure who raised their hand first
to Andre Matt or the other Matt so Andre
I guess you can go
first thank you actually I have a
question to to Ryan and and perhaps
Christopher Also may comment if you see
because it's about inferentialism so
inferentialism as I understand is
primarily about logical inferences right
uh in some standard
semantical sense say we have some
premises which are propositions
and infer some conclusion uh however
large linguistic models again to my
limited understanding it just works like
predicting
next uh next symbol or next word right
from the vocabulary just given some uh
early given world so
syntactically it it may work similarly
right we have some some symbolic
expressions and
uh we get a new one but actually there
are still two differences one that's
still it's statistical right in a
linguistic model is not uh we have no
like rule I don't know if but at least
this is the difference right and the
second it still again that we don't have
anything like uh logical semantic
nothing like ideal of from say
propositional uh logical inference so it
works of course for like logical
semantics like for Genson example for
logical vocabulary but
uh uh I somehow can't quite see how this
Gap can be really filled
to extend the same principle say of all
vocabulary and specifically on large
linguistic model
thanks uh yeah so thanks yeah so I mean
the first thing um with respect to the
characterization of inferentialism I
mean one the question sort of dividing
whether one adopts a restricted approach
or the global approach is which set of
inference get included in the
inferentialist theory right so if you
have a logical inferentialism right
where you're restricting yourself to
just saying logical vocabulary those
meanings are constituted by inferential
role then the inferences that you're
looking at are going to be the logical
inferences um but the crucial thought in
extending it to all vocabulary is that
what sellers uh and brandom call
material inferences also get included
right so these are inferences like you
know something's red so so it's colored
right and two Thoughts with respect to
the you know whether you can apply this
model of understanding to a to a large
language model um the sort of solarian
thought I'm working with is you know
obviously if you look under the hood
what's going on there is completely
different than what's going on uh when
we're you know reasoning um but the
thought is you know the question of
whether or not you ought to say right
whether or not it's apt to say you know
it understands what it's saying isn't to
be decided by you know the processes
that are actually going on under the
Hood but rather whether we can sort of
afford this sort of uh normative status
to it right treat it as responsible for
what it says in the sense of it's being
capable of responding to challenges
clarifi clarifying and whatnot um and I
don't see any in principle reason why we
shouldn't why we couldn't uh afford it
that sort of
responsibility um with respect to you
know extending you know these material
having these material inferences I take
it that that you can principle I mean
the thought there is those inferences
are going to be sort of implicit in the
entire Corpus of text that it gets fed
right so you know if you take everything
that's ever been written